PLAYER'S HANDBOOK'
I

I -',
"

)
,

)
,

.

\

'.

•

~...

•

.

CREDITS

0&0 Lead Designers:

Additional Contributors: Kim Mohan, Mal! Sernel!,
Chris Dupuis, Tom LaPille, Richard Baker, Miranda Horner,
Jennifer Clarke Wilkes, Steve Winter, Nina Hess,
Steve Townshend, Chris Youngs, Ben Petrisor, Tom Olsen

Mike Mearls, Jeremy Crawford

P/aye,'s Handbaok Lead: jeremy Crawford
Rules Development: Rodney Thompson, Peter Lee
Writing: James Wyatt, Robert J. Schwalb, Bruce R. Cordell
Editing: Michele Carter, Chris Sims, Scol! Fitzgerald Gray,
Christopher Perkins
Producer: Greg Bilsland

Project Management:
Neil Shinkle, Kim Graham, John Hay
Production Services: Cynda Callaway, Brian Dumas,
Jefferson Dunlap, David Gershman, Anita Williams
Brand and Marketing: Nathan Stewart, Liz Schuh,
Chris Lindsay, Shelly Mazzanoble, Hilary Ross,
Laura Tommervik, Kim Lundstrom, Trevor Kidd

Art Directors: Kate Irwin, Dan Gelon, Jon Schindehette,
Mari Kolkowsky, Melissa Rapier, Shauna Narciso
Graphic Designers: Bree Heiss, Emi Tanji, Barry Craig
Cover IlIustrator: Tyler Jacobson
Interior IIlustrators: Steve Argyle, Tom Babbey, Daren Bader,
Drew Baker, Mark Behm, Eric Belisle, Christopher Bradley,
Noah Bradley, Sam Burley, Clint Cearley, Milivoj Ceran,
Sidharth Chaturvedi, Jedd Chevrier, jD, Allen Douglas,
Jesper Ejsing, Craig Elliott, Wayne England, Scott M. Fischer,
Randy Gallegos, Justin Gerard, Florian De Gesincourt, Lars
Grant-West, Jon Hodgson, Ralph Horsley, Lake Hurwitz,
Tyler Jacobson, Kekai Kotaki, Olly Lawson, Raphael Lübke,
Titus Lunter, Slawomir Maniak, Brynn Metheney, Aaran
Miller, Christopher Moeller, Mark Molnar, Scott Murphy,
William O'Connor, Hector Ortiz, David Palumbo, Alessandra
Pisa no, Claudio Pozas, Rob Rey, Wayne Reynolds, Aaron J.
Riley, Chris Seaman, Cynthia Sheppard, Craig J Spearing,
John Stanko, Matt Stawicki, Alex Stone, Thom Tenery, Cory
Trego-Erdner, Beth Tratt, Autumn Rain Turkel, jose Vega,
Tyler Walpole, Julian Kok Joon Wen, Richard Whitters, Eva
Widermann, Ben Wootten, Kieran Yanner

Based on the original game created by
E. Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson,
with Brian Blume, Rob Kuntz, james Ward, and Don Kaye
Drawing from further development by
j. Eric Holmes, Tom Moldvay, Frank Mentzer, Aaron Allston,
Harold Johnson, Roger E. Moore, David "Zeb" Cook, Ed
Greenwood, Tracy Hickman, Margaret Weis, Douglas Niles,
jeffGrubb, Jonathan Tweet, Monte Cook, Skip Williams,
Richard Baker, Peter Adkison, Keith Baker, Bill Slavicsek,
Andy Collins, and Rob Heinsoo
Playtesting provided by
over 175,000 fans of D&D. Thank you!
Additional consultation provided by
JeffGrubb, Kenneth Hite, Kevin Kulp, Robin Laws,
S. John Ross, the RPGPundit, Vincent Venturella, and Zak S.

ON lHE COVER
In this fiery scene illustrated by Tyler
Jacobson, the fire giant King Snurre,
suffering no fools to live, calls his hell
hounds to join him in confronting
unwelcome guests in his home.

Disc/a;mer: W;zards afIne Coost ;5 nal responsible for the consequences of sp/itting up lhe parl'l, sliding oppendages in lhe maulh af Q leering green devi/face,
iram bugbears, storming lhe ftas! hall of Q hill g;ont steading, angering o dragon af eln)' ",ariely, or saying yes when lhe DM asks. "Are you real/I' 5ure?"

620A9217000001 EN
ISBN: 978-0-7869-6560-1
First Printing: August 2014

occepting a dirlrler ;"1';101;0"

CE

987654321
DUNGEONS

& ORAGONS.

0&0,

Wízards ofthe (oast, Forgotten Realms, the dragon ampersand.

the Caast praduct names, and their respective logos are trademarks arwizards
orWizards

Player's Handbook.

Monster Manual,

Dungeon Moste,'s Gtúde, ali other Wizards af

ofthe Coast in lhe USA and other counlries. Ali characters and their distinctive likenesses are property

ofthe Coast. This material is protected under the copyright laws or the United States of America. Any reproduction or unaulhorized

herein is prohibited without the express written permission ofWizards

Printed in the USA. @2014 Wizards or the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057.0707,
Represented by Hasbm ElImpe 4 lhe SQlJare Stockley park Uxbrjdge

use ofthe material or artwork contained

of the Coast.

Mjddlesex

!lBU

lEI

USA. Manufactured
LJK

by Hasbro SA, Rue Emile.Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont, CH.

CONTENTS
PREFACE

4

INTRODUCTION

5

Worlds of Adventure
Using This Book
How to Play
Adventures

5
6
6
7

PART 1

9

PART2
7: USING ABILITY
Ability Scores and Modifiers
Advantage and Oisadvantage
Proficiency Bonus
Ability Checks
Using Each Ability
Saving Throws

CHAPTER

CHAPTER
CHAPTER

1: STEP-By-STEP

CHARACTERS

Beyond 1st Level
CHAPTER

15

2: RACES

17

Choosing a Race
Owarf
Elf
Hal fiing
Human
Oragonborn
Gnome
Half.Elf
Half-Orc
Tiefling
CHAPTER

17
18
21
26
29
32
35
38
40
.42

3: CLASSES

45

Ba rbaria n
Bard
Cleric
Oruid
Fighter
Monk
Paladin
Ranger
Rogue
Sorcerer
Warlock
Wizard
CHAPTER 4: PERSONALITY
BACKG ROUN D

ll

46
51
56
64
70
76
82
89
94
99
105
112
AND

Character Oetails
Inspiration
Backgrounds

121
121
125
125

5: EQUIPMENT
Starting Equipment...
Wealth
Armor and Shields
Weapons
Adventuring Gear
Tools
Mounts and Vehicles
Trade Goods
Expenses
Tri n kets

143
143
143
144
146
148
154
155
157
157
159

CHAPTER

6: CUSTOMIZATION
MuIticlassi ng
Feats

CHAPTER

OPTIONS

163
163
165

171
SCORES

8: ADVENTURING

181
181
181
183
185
186
186

Time
Movement
The Environment
Social Interaction
Resting
Between Adventures
CHAPTER

173
173
173
173
174
175
179

9: COMBAT

189
189
190
192
193
196
196
198
198

The Order of Combat
Movement and Position
Actions in Combat
Making an Attack
Cover
Oamage and Healing
Mounted Combat...
Underwater Combat

PART3

199

10: SPELLCASTING
What Is a Spell?
Casting a Spell

201
201
202

11: SPELLS
Spe11Lists
Spel1 Oescriptions

207
207
211

CHAPTER

CHAPTER

:

ApPENDIX A: CONDITIONS

290

ApPENDIX B:
GODS OF THE MULTIVERSE

293

ApPENDIX C:
THE PLANES OF EXISTENCE

300

The Material Planc
Beyond the Material

300
301

ApPENDIX D:
CREATURE STATISTICS

304

ApPENDIX E:
INSPIRATIONAL

312

READING

INDEX
CHARACTER

313

SHEET

317

PREFACE
NCE UPON A TIME, LONG, LONG AGO, IN A

realm called the Midwestern United
States-specifically
the states of Minnesota and Wisconsin-a group of friends
gathered together to forever alter the
history of gaming.
1twasn't their intent to do so. They were
tired of merely reading tales about worlds of magic,
monsters, and adventure. They wanted to play in those
worlds, rather than observe them. That they went on
to invent OUNGEONS & ORAGONS, and thereby ignite a
revolution in gaming that continues to this day, speaks
to two things.
First, it speaks to their ingenuity and genius in figuring out that games were the perfect way to explore
worlds that could not otherwise exist. Almost every
modern game, whether played on a digital device or
a tabletop, owes some debt to 0&0.
Second, it is a testament to the inherent appeal of the
game they created. OUNGEONS & ORAGONS sparked a
thriving global phenomenon. [t is the first roleplaying
game, and it remains one of the best of its breed.
To play 0&0. and to play it well, you don't need to
read ali the rules, memorize every detail of the game,
or master the fine art of rolling funny looking dice.
None of those things have any bearing on what's best
about the game.
What you need are two things, the first being friends
with whom you can share the game. Playing games with
your friends is a lot of fun, but 0&0 does something
more than entertain.
Playing 0&0 is an exerci se in collaborative creation.
Vou and your friends create epic stories filled with tension and memorable drama. Vou create silly in-jokes
that make you laugh years later. The dice will be cruel
to you. but you will soldier on. Your collective creativity will build stories that you will tell again and again.
ranging from the utlerly absurd to the stuff of legend.
If you don't have friends interested in playing, don't
worry. There's a special alchemy that takes place
around a 0&0 table thal nothing else can match. Play
the game with someone enough, and the two of you

PREFACE

are !ikely to end up friends. It's a cool side effect of the
game. Your next gaming group is as close as the nearest
game store, on!ine forum, or gaming convention.
The second thing you need is a lively imagination
or, more importantly, the willingness to use whatever
imagination you have. Vou don't need to be a master
storyteller or a brilliant artist. Vou just need to aspire to
create, to have the courage of someone who is willing to
build something and share it with others.
Luckily. just as 0&0 can strengthen your friendships,
it can help build in you the confidence to create and
share. 0&0 is a game that teaches you to look for the
clever solution, share the sudden ide a that can overcome
a problem, and push yourself to imagine what could be,
rather than simply accept what is.
The first characters and adventures you create will
probably be a collection of clichés. That's true of everyone, from the greatest Dungeon Masters in history on
down. Accept this rea!ity and move on to create the
second character or adventure, which will be betler,
and then the third, which will be betler still. Repeat that
over the course of time, and soon you'lI be able to create
anything, from a character's background story to an epic
world of fantasy adventure.
Once you have that skill, it's yours forever. Countless
writers, artists, and other creators can trace their beginnings to a few pages of 0&0 notes, a handful of dice,
and a kitchen table.
Above ali else, 0&0 is yours. The friendships you
make around the table will be unique to you. The adventures you embark on. the characters you create, the
memories you make-these will be yours. 0&0 is your
personal corner of the universe, a place where you have
free reign to do as you wish.
Go forth now. Read the rules of the game and the
story of its worlds, but always remember that you are
the one who brings them to !ife. They are nothing
without the spark of !ife that you give them.
Mike Mearls
May 2014

INTRODUCTION
HEDUNGEONS& DRAGONSROLEPLAYING
game is about storytelling in worlds of
swords and sorcery. !t shares elements
with childhood games of make-believe. Like
those games, 0&0 is driven by imagination. !t's about picturing the towering castle
beneath the stormy night sky and imagining
howa fantasy adventurer might react to the challenges
that scene presents.
Oungeon Master (OM): After passing through the
craggy peaks, the road takes a sudden turn to the east
and Castle Ravenloft towers before you. Crumbling
towers of stone keep a silent watch over the approach.
They look like abandoned guardhouses. Beyond these,
a wide chasm gapes, disappearing into the deep
fog below. A lowered drawbridge spans the chasm,
leading to an arched entrance to the castle courtyard.
The chains of the drawbridge creak in the wind, their
rust.eaten iron straining with the weight. From atop
the high strong walls, stone gargoyles stare at you
from hollow sockets and grin hideously. A rotting
wooden portcullis, green with growth, hangs in the
entry tunnel. Beyond this, the main doors ofCastle
Ravenloft stand open, a rich warm light spilling into
the courtyard.
Phillip (playing Gareth): I want to look at the
gargoyles. I have a feeling they're not just statues.
Amy (playing Rival:The drawbridge looks precarious?
I want to see how sturdy it is. Do I think we can cross
it, or is it going to collapse under our weight?
Unlike a game of make-believe, 0&0 gives structure
to the stories, a way of determining the consequences
of the adventurers' action. Players roll dice to resolve
whether their attacks hit or miss or whether their adventurers can scale a cliff, roll away from the strike of a
magicallightning bolt, or pull off some other dangerous
task. Anything is possible, but the dice make some outcomes more probable than others.
Oungeon Master (OM): OK, one at a time. Phillip,
you're looking at the gargoyles?
Phillip: Yeah. 15 there any hint they might be
creatures and not decorations?
OM: Make an Intelligence check.
Phillip: Does my Investigation skill apply?
OM: Sure!
Phillip (rolling a d20): Ugh. Seven.
OM: They look like decorations to you. And Amy,
Riva is checking out the drawbridge?

In the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame, each player
creates an adventurer (also called a character) and
teams up with other adventurers (played by friends).
Working together, the group might explore a dark dungeon, a ruined city, a haunted castle. a lost temple deep
in a jungle, or a lava-filled cavero beneath a mysterious
mountain. The adventurers can solve puzzles, talk with
other characters, battle fantastic monsters, and discover
fabulous magic items and other treasure.
One player, however, takes on the role of the Dungeon
Master (DM). the game's lead storyteller and referee.
The DM creates adventures for the characters, who navigate its hazards and decide which paths to explore. The
DM might describe the entrance to Castle Ravenloft,
and the players decide what they want their adventurers
to do. WilI they walk across the dangerously weathered
drawbridge? Tie themselves together with rope to minimize the chance that someone will fali if the drawbridge
gives way? Or cast a spell to carry them over the chasm?
Then the DM determines the results of the adventurers' actions and narrates what they experience. Because
the DM can improvise to react to anything the players
attempt, 0&0 is infinitely f1exible, and each adventure
can be exciting and unexpected.
The game has no real end; when one story or quest
wraps up, another one can begin, creating an ongoing
story called a campaign. Many people who play the
game keep their campaigns going for months or years.
meeting with their friends every week or so to pick
up the story where they left off. The adventurers grow
in might as the campaign continues. Each monster
defeated, each adventure completed, and each treasurc
recovered not only adds to the continuing story, but also
earos the adventurers new capabilities. This increase
in power is reflected by an adventurer's leveI.
There's no winning and losing in the DUNGEONS&
DRAGONSgame-at least, not the way those terms are
usually understood. Together, the DM and lhe players
create an exciting story of bold adventurers who confront
deadly perils. Sometimes an adventurer might come to
a grisly end, toro apart by ferocious monsters or done in
bya nefarious villain. Even so, the other adventurers can
search for powerful magic to revive their fallen comrade,
or the player might choose to create a new character to
carry on. The group might fail to complete an adventure
successfully, but if everyone had a good time and created
a memorable story, they ali win.

WORLDS OF ADVENTURE
The many worlds of the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame
are places of magic and monsters, of brave warriors and
spectacular adventures. They begin with a foundation
of medieval fantasy and then add the creatures, places,
and magic that make these worlds unique.
The worlds of the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame exist
within a vast cosmos called the multiverse, connected
in strange and mysterious ways to one another and to
other planes of existence. such as the Elemental Plane
of Fire and the lnfinite Depths of the Abyss. Within
lNTRODUl

TION

this multiverse are an endless variety of worlds. Many
of them have been published as official settings for the
D&D game. The legends of the Forgotten Realms, Dragonlance, Greyhawk, Dark Sun, Mystara, and Eberron
settings are woven together in the fabric of the multiverse. Alongside these worlds are hundreds of thousands
more, created by generations of D&D players for their
own games. And amid ali the richness of the multiverse,
you might create a world of your own.
Ali these worlds share characteristics, but each world
is set apart by its own history and cultures, distinctive
monsters and races, fantastic geography, anciem dungeons, and scheming villains. Some races have unusual
traits in different worlds. The halflings of the Dark Sun
setting, for example, are jungle-dwelling cannibals,
and the elves are desert nomads. Some worlds feature
races unknown in other settings, such as Eberron's warforged, soldiers created and imbued with life to fight in
the Last War. Some worlds are dominated by one great
story, like the War of the Lance that plays a central role
in the Dragonlance setting. But they're ali D&D worlds,
and you can use the rules in this book to create a character and play in any one of them.
Your DM might set the campaign on one of these
worlds or on one that he or she created. Because there
is so much diversity among the worlds of D&D, you
should check with your DM about any house rules that
will affect your play of the game. Ultimately, the Dungeon Master is the authority on the campaign and its
setting, even if the setting is a published world.

USING THIS BOOK
The Player's Handbook is divided into three parts.
Part 1 is about creating a character, providing the
rules and guidance you need to make the character
you'lI play in the game. It includes information on the
various races, classes, backgrounds, equipment, and
other customization options that you can choose from.
Many of the rules in part 1 rely on material in parts 2
and 3. If you come across a game concept in part 1 that
you don't understand, consult the book's indexo
Part 2 details the rules of how to play the game,
beyond the basics described in this introduction. That
part covers the kinds of die rolls you make to determine
success or failure at the tasks your character attempts,
and describes the three broad categories of activity in
the game: exploration, interaction, and combat.
Part 3 is ali about magic. It covers the nature of magic
in the worlds of D&D, the rules for spellcasting, and the
huge variety of spells available to magic-using characters (and monsters) in the game.

HOWTO

PLAY

The play of the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame unfolds
according to this basic pattern.
1. The DM describes the environment. The DM
tells the players where their adventurers are and what's
around them, presenting the basic scope of options that
present themselves (how many doors lead out of a roam,
what's on a table, who's in the tavern, and so on).

6

INTRODUCTION

2. The players describe what they want to do. Sometimes one player speaks for the whole party, saying,
"We'lI take the east door," for example. Other times,
different adventurers do different things: one adventurer
might search a treasure chest while a second examines
an esoteric symbol engraved on a wall and a third keeps
watch for monsters. The players don't need to take
turns, but the DM listens to every player and decides
how to resolve those actions.
Sometimes, resolving a task is easy. If an adventurer
wants to walk across a roam and open a door, the DM
might just say that the door opens and describe what
lies beyond. But the doar might be locked, the floor
might hide a deadly trap, or some other circumstance
might make it challenging for an adventurer to complete
a task. In those cases, the DM decides what happens,
often relying on the roll of a die to determine the results
of an action.
3. The DM narrates the results ofthe adventurers'
actions. Describing the results often leads to another
decision point, which brings the flow of the game right
back to step 1.
This pattern holds whether the adventurers are cautiously exploring a ruin, talking to a devious prince, or
locked in mortal combat against a mighty dragon. In
certain situations, particularly combat, the action is
more structured and the players (and DM) do take turns
choosing and resolving actions. But most of the time,
play is fluid and flexible, adapting to the circumstances
of the adventure.
Often the action of an adventure takes place in the
imagination of the players and DM, relying on the DM's
verbal descriptions to set the scene. Some DMs like to
use music, art, ar recorded sound effects to help set the
mood, and many players and DMs alike adopt different
voices for the various adventurers, monsters, and other
characters they play in the game. Sometimes, a DM
might lay out a map and use tokens ar miniature figures
to represent each creature involved in a scene to help
the players keep track of where everyone is.
GAME DrCE
The game uses polyhedral dice with different numbers
of sides. Vou can find dice like these in game stores and
in many bookstores.
In these rules, the different dice are referred to by the
letter d followed by the number of sides: d4, d6, dS, dI O,
d12, and d20. For instance, a d6 is a six-sided die (the
typical cube that many games use).
Percentile dice, ar d100, work a little differently. Vou
generate a number between 1 and 100 by rolling two
different ten-sided dice numbered from Oto 9. One die
(designated before you roll) gives the tens digit, and
the other gives the ones digit. If you roll a 7 and a 1, for
example, the number rolled is 71. Two Os represent 100.
Some ten-sided dice are numbered in tens (00, 10, 20,
and so on), making it easier to distinguish the tens digit
from the ones digit. In this case, a roll of 70 and I is 71,
and 00 and O is 100.
When you need to roll dice, the rules tell you how
many dice to roll of a certain type, as well as what modifiers to add. For example, "3dS + 5" means you roll

three eight-sided dice, add them together, and add 5
to the tota!.
The same d notation appears in the expressions "ld3"
and "ld2." To simulate the roll of Id3, roll a d6 and
divide the number rolled by 2 (round up). To simulate
the roll of Id2, roll any die and assign a I or 2 to the roll
depending on whether it was odd or even. (Alternatively,
if the number rolled is more than half the number of
sides on the die, it's a 2.)
THE D20
Does an adventurer's sword swing hurt a dragon or just
bounce off its iron-hard scales? Will the ogre believe an
outrageous bluff? Can a character swim across a raging
river? Can a character avoid the main blast of a fireball,
or does he or she take full damage from the blaze? In
cases where the outcome of an action is uncertain,
the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame relies on rolls of a
20-sided die, a d20, to determine success or failure.
Every character and monster in the game has capabilities defined by six ability scores. The abilities are
Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom,
and Charisma, and they typically range from 3 to 18
for most adventurers. (Monsters might have scores as
lowas I or as high as 30.) These ability scores, and the
ability modifiers derived from them, are the basis for
almost every d20 roll that a player makes on a character's or monster's behalf.
Ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws are the
three main kinds of d20 rolls, forming the core of the
rules of the game. AIl three follow these simple steps.
1. Roll the die and add a modifier. Roll a d20 and
add the relevant modifier. This is typically the modifier derived from one of the six ability scores, and it
sometimes includes a proficiency bonus to reflect a character's particular skill. (See chapter I for details on each
ability and how to determine an ability's modifier.)
2. Apply circumstantial
bonuses and penalties. A
class feature, a spell, a particular circumstance, ar some
other effect might give a bonus or penalty to the check.

3. Compare the total to a target number. If the total
equals or exceeds the target number, the ability check,
attack roll, or saving throw is a success. Otherwise, it's
a failure. The DM is usually the one who determines
target numbers and tells players whether their ability
checks, attack rolls, and saving throws succeed or fai!'
The target number for an ability check or a saving
throw is called a Difficulty Class (DC). The target
number for an attack roll is called an Armor Class (AC).
This sim pie rule governs the resolution of most tasks
in D&D play. Chapter 7 provides more detailed rules for
using the d20 in the game.

ADVANTAGE AND DISADVANTAGE
Sometimes an ability check, attack roll, or saving throw
is modified by special situations called advantage and
disadvantage. Advantage reflects the positive circumstances surrounding a d20 roll, while disadvantage
reflects the opposite. When you have either advantage or
disadvantage, you roll a second d20 when you make the
roll. Use the higher of the two rolls if you have advantage, and use the lower roll if you have disadvantage.
For example, if you have disadvantage and roll a 17 and
a 5, you use the 5. If you instead have advantage and roll
those numbers, you use the 17.
More detailed rules for advantage and disadvantage
are presented in chapter 7.

SPECIFIC

BEATS GENERAL

This book contains rules, especially in parts 2 and 3,
that govern how the game plays. That said, many racial
traits, class features, spells, magic items, monster abilities, and other game elements break the general ruIes in
some way, creating an exception to how the rest of the
game works. Remember this: lf a specific ruIe contradicts a general rule, the specific rule wins.
Exceptions to the rules are often minor. For instance,
many adventurers don't have proficiency with longbows,
but every wood elf does because of a racial trait. That
trait creates a minor exception in the game. Other
examples of rule-breaking are more conspicuous. For
instance, an adventurer can't normally pass through
walls, but some spells make that possible. Magic
accounts for most of the major exceptions to the rules.

ROUND DOWN
There's one more general rule you need to know at the
outset. Whenever you divide a number in the game,
round down if you end up with a fraction, even if the
fraction is one-half or greater.

ADVENTURES
The DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame consists of a group
of characters embarking on an adventure that the Dungeon Master presents to them. Each character brings
particular capabilities to the adventure in the form of
ability scores and skills, class features, racial traits,
equipment, and magic items. Every character is different, with various strengths and weaknesses, so the
best party of adventurers is one in which the characters
complement each other and cover the weaknesses of
INTRODUCTION

7

their companions. The advenlurers musl coopera te to
successfully complete the adventure.
The adventure is the heart of the game, a story with
a beginning, a middle, and an end. An adventure might
be created by the Dungeon Master or purchased off the
shelf, tweaked and modified to suit the DM's needs and
desires. In either case, an adventure features a fantastic
selting, whether it's an underground dungeon, a crumbling castle, a stretch of wilderness, or a bustIing city.
It features a rieh cast of characters: the adventurers
created and played by the other players at the table,
as well as nonplayer characters (NPCs). Those characters might be palrons, allies, enemies, hirelings, or
just background extras in an adventure. Often, one of
the NPCs is a villain whose agenda drives much of an
adventure's action.
Over the course of their adventures, the characters
are confronted bya variety of creatures, objects, and
situations that they must deal with in some way. Sometimes the adventurers and other creatures do their
best to kill or capture each other in combat. At other
times, the adventurers talk to another creature (or even
a magical object) with a goal in mind. And often, the
adventurers spend time trying to solve a puzzIe, bypass
an obstacle, find something hidden, or unraveI the current situation. Meanwhile, the adventurers explore the
worId, making decisions about which way lo traveI and
what they'1I try to do next.
Adventures vary in length and complexity. A short
adventure might present only a few challenges, and
it might take no more than a single game session to
complete. A long adventure can involve hundreds of
combats, interactions, and other challenges, and take
dozens of sessions to play through, stretching over
weeks or months of real time. Usually, the end of an
adventure is marked by the adventurers heading back to
civilization to rest and enjoy the spoils of their labors.
Sut that's not the end of the story. Vou can think of
an adventure as a single episode of a TV series, made
up of multiple exciting scenes. A campaign is the whole
series-a string of adventures joined together, with a
consistent group of advenlurcrs following the narrative
from start to finish.

THE THREE PILLARS OF ADVENTURE
Adventurers can try to do anything their players can
imagine, bul it can be helpful to talk about their activities in three broad categories: exploration, social
interaction, and combat.
ExpIoration includes both lhe adventurers' movement
through the worId and their interaction with objects and
situations that require their altention. Exploration is the
give-and-take of the players describing what lhey wanl
their characters lO do, and the Dungeon Master telling
the players whal happens as a result. On a large scale,
that might involve lhe characters spending a day crossing a rolling plain or an hour making lheir way through
caverns underground. On the smallest scale, il could
mean one characler pulling a lever in a dungeon room lo
see what happens.
Social interaction features the advenlurers talking to
someone (or something) else. lt might mean demanding

8

INTRODUCTION

that a captured scout reveal the secret entrance to the
goblin lair, getting information from a rescued prisoner,
pleading for mercy from an ore chieftain, or persuading
a talkative magic mirror to show a dislant location to
the advenlurers.
The rules in chapters 7 and 8 support exploration and
social interaclion, as do many c1ass features in chapler 3
and personality traits in chapter 4.
Combat, the focus of chapter 9, involves characters
and other creatures swinging weapons, casting spells,
maneuvering for position, and so on-all in an effort
to defeat their opponents, whether that means killing
every enemy, laking captives, or forcing a rout. Combat
is the most struclured element of a D&D session, with
creatures taking turns to make sure that everyone gets
a chance to act. Even in the contexl of a pitched battIe,
there's still plenty of opportunity for adventurers to
altempt wacky stunts like surfing down a lIight of stairs
on a shield, to examine the environment (perhaps by
pulling a mysterious lever), and lOinteract with other
creatures, including allies, enemies, and neutral parties.

THE WONDERS OF MAGIC
Few D&D adventures end without something magical
happening. Whether helpful or harmful, magie appears
frequently in the life of an advenlurer, and it is the focus
of chapters 10 and 11.
In the worlds of DUNGEONS& DRAGONS,practitioners
of magic are rare, set apart from the masses of people
by their extraordinary talent. Common foIk l11ightsee
evidcnce of magic on a regular basis, but it's usually
minor-a fantastic monster, a visibly answered prayer,
a wizard walking through the streets with an animated
shieId guardian as a bodyguard.
For adventurers, though, magic is key to their surviva\. Without the healing magie of c1erics and paladins,
adventurers would quickly succumb to their wounds.
Wilhout the uplifting magieal support of bards and
c1erics, warriors might be overwhelmed by powerful
foes. Withoul the sheer magieal power and versatility
of wizards and druids, every threat would bc magnified tenfold.
Magic is also a favored tool of villains. Many adventures are driven by the machinations of spellcaslers
who are hellbent on using magic for some ill end. A cult
leader seeks to awaken a god who slumbers beneath
the sea, a hag kidnaps youths to magically drain them
of lheir vigor, a mad wizard labors to invest an army of
automatons with a facsimile of life, a dragon begins a
mystical ritual to rise up as a god of destruction-these
are just a few of the magical threats that adventurers
might face. With magic of their own, in the form of
spells and magic items, the adventurers might prevail!

PARTl

PART 1

CREi\TING

H!\RA

9

CHAPTER 1: STEP-By-STEP
OURFIRSTSTEPINPLAYING
ANADVENTURER
INTHE
DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame is to imagine
and create a character of your own. Your
character is a combination of game statistics,
roleplaying hooks, and your imagination. Vou
choose a race (such as human or halfling) and
a class (such as fighter or wizard). Vou also
invent the personality, appearance, and backstory of
your character. Once completed, your character serves
as your representative in the game, your avatar in the
DUNGEONS& DRAGONSworld.
Before you dive into step 1 below, think about the
kind of adventurer you want to play. Vou might be a
courageous fighter, a skulking rogue, a fervent cleric, or
a flamboyant wizard. Or you might be more interested
in an unconventional character, such as a brawny rogue
who likes hand-to-hand combat, or a sharpshooter who
picks of[ enemies from afar. Do you like fantasy fiction
featuring dwarves or elves? Try building a character of
one of those races. Do you want your character to be the
toughest adventurer at the table? Consider a class like
barbarian or paladin.lfyou don't know where else to
begin, take a look at the illustrations in this book to see
what catches your interest.
Once you have a character in mind, follow these steps
in order, making decisions that reflect the character you
want. Your conception of your character might evolve
with each choice you make. What's important is that you
come to the table with a character you're excited to play.
Throughout this chapter, we use the term character
sheet to mean whatever you use to track your character,
whether it's a formal character sheet (like the one at the
end of this book), some form of digital record, or a piece
of notebook paper. An official 0&0 character sheet is a
fine place to start until you know what information you
need and how you use it during the game.
BUILDING

BRUENOR

Each step of character creation includes an example of
that step, with a player named Bob building his dwarf
character, Bruenor.

1. CHOOSE A RACE
Every character belongs to a race, one of the many
intelligent humanoid species in the 0&0 world. The
most common player character races are dwarves, elves,
halflings, and humans. Some races also have subraces,
such as mountain dwarf or wood elf. Chapter 2 provides
more information about these races, as well as the less
widespread races of dragonborn, gnomes, half-elves,
half-orcs, and tieflings.
The race you choose contributes to your character's
identity in an important way, by establishing a general
appearance and the natural talents gained from culture
and ancestry. Your character's race grants particular
racial traits, such as special senses, proficiency with
certain weapons or toois, proficiency in one or more
skills, or the ability to use minor spells. These traits
sometimes dovetail with the capabilities of certain

CHARACTERS
classes (see step 2). For example, the racial traits of
lightfoot halflings make them exceptional rogues, and
high elves tend to be powerful wizards. Sometimes
playing against type can be fun, too. Half-orc paladins
and mountain dwarf wizards, for example, can be
unusual but memorable characters.
Your race also increases one or more of your ability
scores, which you determine in step 3. Note these
increases and remember to apply them later.
Record the traits granted by your race on your
character sheet. Be sure to note your starting
languages and your base speed as well.
BUILDING

BRUENOR,

STEP

I

Bob is sitting down to create his character. He decides
that a gruff mountain dwarf fits the character he wants
to play. He notes ali the racial traits of dwarves on his
character sheet, including his speed of 25 feet and the
languages he knows: Common and Dwarvish.

2. CHOOSE A CLASS
Every adventurer is a member of a class. Class broadly
describes a character's vocation, what special talents he
or she possesses, and the tactics he or she is most likely
to employ when exploring a dungeon, fighting monsters,
or engaging in a tense negotiation. The character
classes are described in chapter 3.
Your character receives a number of benefits from
your choice of class. Many of these benefits are class
features-capabilities
(including spellcasting) that set
your character apart from members of other classes.
Vou also gain a number of proficiencies: armor,
weapons, skills, saving throws, and some times tools.
Your proficiencies define many of the things your
character can do particularly well, from using certain
weapons to telling a convincing lie.
On your character sheet, record ali the features that
your class gives you at 1st leveI.
LEVEL

Typically, a character starts at 1st levei and advances
in levei by adventuring and gaining experience points
(XP). A 1st-levei character is inexperienced in the
adventuring world, although he or she might have been
a soldier or a pirate and done dangerous things before.
Starting of[ at 1st levei marks your character's entry
into the adventuring life. If you're already familiar
with the game, or ifyou arejoining an existing 0&0
campaign, your DM might decide to have you begin at a
higher levei, on the assumption that your character has
already survived a few harrowing adventures.
4
QUICK

•
BUILD

Each e1ass description in chapter 3 ineludes a section
offering suggestions to quickly build a character of that
e1ass, ineluding how to assign your highest ability scores,
a background suitable to lhe e1ass, and slarting spells.

~

r

PART I I STEP

BY STEP CHARACTERS

11

Record your levei on your character sheet.lfyou're
starting at a higher levei, record the additional elements
your c1ass gives you for your leveis past 1sI. Also record
your experience points. A 1st-levei character has O
XP. A higher-Ievel character typically begins with the
minimum amount of XP required to reach that levei
(see "Beyond 1st Levei" later in this chapter).
HIT POINTS AND HIT DICE

Your character's hit points define how tough your
character is in combat and other dangerous situations.
Your hit points are determined by your Hit Dice (short
for Hit Point Dice).
ABILITY

SCORE

SUMMARY

Measures: Natural athletieism, bodily power
Important for: Barbarian, fighter, paladin
Raciallncreases:
dwarf (+2)

Dragonborn

(+2)

(+1)

Dexterity
Measures: Physieal agility, reflexes, balance, poise
Important for: Monk, ranger, rogue
Raciallncreases:
Elf (+2)

Forest gnome (+1)
Human (+1)

Halfling (+2)
Constitution
Measures: HeaJth, stamina,
Important for: Everyone
RaGÍallncreases:

vital force

Dwarf (+2)

Half-ore (+1)
Human (+1)

Stout halfling (+1)
Roek gnome (+1)
Intelligenee

Measures: Mental aeuity, information reeall, analytieal
Important for: Wizard
Raciallncreases:
Tiefling (+1)
High elf (+1)
Gnome

Human

(+2)

Wisdom
Measures: Awareness, intuition,
Important for: Clerie, druid
Racial Jncreases:
Hill dwarf (+1)
Wood elf (+1)

(+1)

insight

Human

(+1)

Measures: Confidenee, eloquenee, leadership
Importantfor:
Bard, soreerer, warloek
Raciallncreases:
Half.elf (+2)
Dragonborn (+1)
Drow (+1)
Human (+1)
Lightfoot halfling (+1)
Tiefling (+2)

PART 1 I STEP-BY-STEP

skill

Your c1ass determines your weapon proficiencies,
your saving throw proficiencies, and some of your skill
and tool proficiencies. (Skills are described in chapter 7,
tools in chapter 5.) Your background gives you additional
skill and toa I proficiencies, and some races give
you more proficiencies. Be sure to note ali of these
proficiencies, as well as your proficiency bonus, on your
character sheet.
Your proficiency bonus can't be added to a single die
roll ar other number more than once. Occasionally, your
proficiency bonus might be modified (doubled ar halved,
for example) before you apply it. If a circumstance
suggests that your proficiency bonus applies more than
once to the same roll ar that it should be multiplied
more than once, you nevertheless add it only once,
multiply it only once, and halve it only once.
BUILDING

BRUENOR,

CHARACTERS

STEP

2

Bob imagines Bruenor charging into battIe with an axe,
one horo on his helmet broken ofr. He makes Bruenor a
fighter and notes the fighter's proficiencies and 1st-leveI
c1ass features on his character sheet.
As a 1st-leveI fighter, Bruenor has 1 Hit Die-a d 10and starts with hit points equal to la + his Constitution
modifier. Bob notes this, and will record the final
number after he determines Bruenor's Constitution
score (see step 3). Bob also notes the proficiency bonus
for a 1st-levei character, which is +2.

3. DETERMINE

Charisma

12

BONUS

Attack rolls using weapons you're proficient with
Attack rolls with spells you cast
Ability checks using skills you're proficient in
Ability checks using tools you're proficient with
Saving throws you're proficient in
Saving throw DCs for spells you cast (explained in
each spellcasting c1ass)

HaJf-ore (+2)
Human

PROFICIENCY

The table that appears in your c1ass description shows
your proficiency bonus, which is +2 for a 1st-Ievel
character. Your proficiency bonus applies to many of the
numbers you'lI be recording on your character sheet:

Strength

Mounta;n

At 1st levei, your character has 1 Hit Die, and the
die type is determined by your c1ass. Vou start with hit
points equal to the highest roll of that die, as indicated in
your c1ass description. (You also add your Constitution
modifier, which you'lI determine in step 3.) This is also
your hit poiot maximum.
Record your character's hit points on your character
sheet. AIso record the type of Hit Die your character
uses and the number of Hit Dice you have. After you
rest, you can spend Hit Dice to regain hit points (see
"Resting" in chapter 8).

ABILITY

SCORES

Much of what your character does in the game depends
on his ar her six abilities: Strength, Dexterity,
Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma.
Each ability has a score, which is a number you record
on your character sheet.
The six abilities and their use in the game are
described in chapter 7. The Ability Score Summary

table provides a quick reference for what qualities
are measured by each ability, what races increases
which abilities, and what classes consider each ability
particularly importan!.
Vou generate your character's six ability scores
randomly. Roll four 6-sided dice and record the total of
the highest three dice on a piece of scratch paper. Do
this five more times, so that you have six numbers. If
you want to save time or don't like the ide a of randomly
determining ability scores, you can use the following
scores instead: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10,8.
Now take your six numbers and write each number
beside one of your character's six abilities to assign
scores to Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence,
Wisdom, and Charisma. Afterward, make any changes
to your ability scores as a result of your race choice.
After assigning your ability scores, determine
your ability modifiers using the Ability Scores and
Modifiers table. To determine an ability modifier without
consulting the table, subtract 10 fram the ability score
and then divide the result by 2 (round down). Write the
modifier next to each of your scores.
BUILDING

BRUENOR,

STEP

3

Bob decides to use the standard set of scores (15, 14,
13, 12, 10,8) for Bruenor's abilities. Since he's a fighter,
he puts his highest score, 15, in Strength. His nexthighest, 14, goes in Constitution. Bruenor might be a
brash fighter, but Bob decides he wants the dwarf to
be older, wiser, and a good leader, so he puts decent
scores in Wisdom and Charisma. After applying his
racial benefits (increasing Bruenor's Constitution by
2 and his Strength by 2), Bruenor's ability scores and
modifiers look like this: Strength 17 (+3), Dexterity 10
(+0), Constitution 16 (+3), Intelligence 8 (-I), Wisdom 13
(+1), Charisma 12 (+1).
Bob fills in Bruenor's final hit points: 10 + his
Constitution modifier of +3, for a total of 13 hit points.
VARIANT:

CUSTOMIZING

ABILITY

ABILITY

SCORES

ANO MOOIFIERS

Score

Modifier

Score

Modifier

1
2-3
4-5
6-7
8-9
10-11
12-13
14-15

-5
-4
-3
-2
-1
+0
+1
+2

16-17
18-19
20-21
22-23
24-25
26-27
28-29
30

+3
+4
+5
+6
+7
+8
+9
+10

average and nearly equal (13,13,13,12,12,12),
set of numbers between those extremes.

or any

4. DESCRIBE YOUR CHARACTER
Dnce you know the basic game aspects of your
character, it's time to f1esh him or her out as a person.
Your character needs a name. Spend a few minutes
thinking about what he or she looks like and how he or
she behaves in general terms.
Using the information in chapter 4, you can f1esh out
your character's physical appearance and personality
traits. Choose your character's alignment (the moral
compass that guides his or her decisions) and ideaIs.
Chapter 4 also helps you identify the things your
character holds most dear, called bonds, and the ftaws
that could one day undermine him or her.
Your character's background describes where he or
she carne from, his or her original occupation, and the
character's place in the D&D world. Your DM might
offer additional backgrounds beyond the ones included

SCORES

At your Dungeon Master's option, you can use this
variant for determining your ability scores. The method
described here allows you to build a character with a set
of ability scores you choose individually.
Vou have 27 points to spend on your ability scores.
The cost of each score is shown on the Ability Score
Point Cost table. For example, a score of 14 costs 7
points. Using this method, 15 is the highest ability score
you can end up with, before applying racial increases.
Vou can't have a score lower than 8.
This method of determining ability scores enables
you to create a set of three high numbers and three low
ones (15, 15, 15, 8, 8, 8), a set of numbers that are above
ABILlTY

SCORE

POI NT COST

Score

CosI

Score

CosI

8
9
10
11

O

12
13
14
15

4
5
7
9

1
2
3

13

in chapter 4, and might be willing to work with you to
craft a background that's a more precise fit for your
character concept.
A background gives your character a background
feature (a general benefit) and proficiency in two skills,
and it might also give you additionallanguages or
proficiency with certain kinds of tools. Record this
information, along with the personality information
you develop, on your character sheet.
YOUR CHARACTER'S

ABILITIES

Take your character's ability scores and race into
account as you flesh out his or her appearance
and personality. A very strong character with low
Intelligence might think and behave very differently
from a very smart character with low Strength.
For example, high Strength usually corresponds
with a burly or athletic body, while a character with
low Strength might be scrawny or plump.
A character with high Dexterity is probably lithe and
slim, while a character with low Dexterity might be
either gangly and awkward or heavy and thick-fingered.
A character with high Constitution usually looks
healthy, with bright eyes and abundant energy. A
character with low Constitution might be sickly or frai!.
A character with high Intelligence might be highly
inquisitive and studious, while a character with low
Intelligence might speak simply or easily forget details.
A character with high Wisdom has good judgment,
empathy, and a general awareness of what's going on.
A character with low Wisdom might be absent-minded,
foolhardy, or oblivious.
A character with high Charisma exudes confidence,
which is usually mixed with a graceful or intimidating
presence. A character with a low Charisma might come
across as abrasive, inarticulate, or tímido
BUILDING

BRUENOR,

STEP 4

Bob fills in some of Bruenor's basic details: his name,
his sex (male), his height and weight, and his alignment
(Iawful good). His high Strength and Constitution
suggest a healthy, athletic body, and his low Intelligence
suggests a degree of forgetfulness.
Bob decides that Bruenor comes from a noble line,
but his elan was expelled from its homeland when
Bruenor was very young. He grew up working as a smith
in the remote villages of Icewind Dale. But Bruenor
has a heroic destiny-to reelaim his homeland-so
Bob chooses the folk hero background for his dwarf.
He notes the proficiencies and special feature this
background gives him.
Bob has a pretty elear picture of Bruenor's personality
in mind, so he skips the personality traits suggested in
the folk hero background, noting instead that Bruenor is
a caring, sensitive dwarf who genuinely loves his friends
and allies, but he hides this soft heart behind a gruff,
snarling demeanor. He chooses the ideal of fairness
from the list in his background, noting that Bruenor
believes that no one is above the law.
Given his history, Bruenor's bond is obvious: he
aspires to someday reelaim Mithral Hall, his homeland,
from the shadow dragon that drove the dwarves out.

'4.

PART 1 I STEP-BY-STEP

CHARACTERS

His flaw is tied to his caring, sensitive nature-he has a
soft spot for orphans and wayward souls, leading him to
show mercy even when it might not be warranted.

5. CHOOSE E

UIPMENT

Your elass and background determine your character's
starting equipment, ineluding weapons, armor, and
other adventuring gear. Record this equipment on your
character sheet. Ali such items are detailed in chapter 5.
Instead of taking the gear given to you by your elass
and background, you can purchase your starting
equipment. Vou have a number of gold pieces (gp)
to spend based on your elass, as shown in chapter 5.
Extensive lists of equipment, with prices, also appear in
that chapter. If you wish, you can also have one trinket
at no cost (see the trinket table at the end of chapter 5).
Your Strength score limits the amount of gear you can
carry. Try not to purchase equipment with a total weight
(in pounds) exceeding your Strength score times 15.
Chapter 7 has more information on carrying capacity.
ARMOR CLASS

Your Armor Class (AC)represents how well your
character avoids being wounded in battle. Things that
contribute to your AC inelude the armor you wear, the
shield you carry, and your Dexterity modifier. Not ali
characters wear armor or carry shields, however.
Without armor or a shield, your character's AC equals
10 + his or her Dexterity modifier. If your character
wears armor, carries a shield, or both, calculate your
AC using the rules in chapter 5. Record your AC on
your character sheet.
Your character needs to be proficient with armor and
shields to wear and use them effectively, and your armor
and shield proficiencies are determined by your elass.
There are drawbacks to wearing armor or carrying a
shield if you lack the required proficiency, as explained
in chapter 5.
Some spells and elass features give you a different
way to calculate your AC. If you have multiple features
that give you different ways to calculate your AC, you
choose which one to use.
WEAPONS

For each weapon your character wields, calculate the
modifier you use when you attack with the weapon and
the damage you deal when you hit.
When you make an attack with a weapon, you roll
a d20 and add your proficiency bonus (but only if you
are proficient with the weapon) and the appropriate
ability modifier.
For attacks with melee weapons, use your Strength
modifier for attack and damage rolls. A weapon that
has the finesse property, such as a rapier, can use your
Dexterity modifier instead.
For attacks with ranged weapons, use your Dexterity
modifier for attack and damage rolls. A weapon thal
has the thrown property, such as a handaxe, can use
your Strength modifier inslead.

BUILDING

BRUENOR,

STEP

5

Bob writes down the starting equipment from the
fighter c1ass and the folk hero background. His starting
equipment includes chain mail and a shield, which
combine to give Bruenor an Armor Class of 18.
For Bruenor's weapons, Bob chooses a battleaxe
and two handaxes. His battleaxe is a melee weapon,
so Bruenor uses his Strength modifier for his attacks
and damage. His attack bonus is his Strength modifier
(+3) plus his proficiency bonus (+2), for a total of +5.
The battleaxe deals ld8 slashing damage, and Bruenor
adds his Strength modifier to the damage when he
hits, for a total of ld8 + 3 slashing damage. When
throwing a handaxe, Bruenor has the same attack bonus
(handaxes, as thrown weapons, use Strength for attacks
and damage), and the weapon deals ld6 + 3 slashing
damage when it hits.

6. COME TOGETHER
Most 0&0 characters don't work alone. Each character
plays a role within a party, a group of adventurers
working together for a common purpose. Teamwork
and cooperation greatly improve your party's chances
to survive the many perils in lhe worlds of OUNGEONS
& ORAGONS.TaIk to your fellow players and your OM
lo decide whether your characlers know one another,
how they mel, and what sorls of quesls lhe group
might undertake.

BEYOND

1ST LEVEL

As your characler goes on adventures and overcomes
challenges, he or she gains experience, represenled by
experience poinls. A character who reaches a specified
experience poinl tolal advances in capabilily. This
advancemenl is called gaining a leveI.
When your characler gains a leveI, his or her c1ass
often granls addilional features, as delailed in the
c1ass description. Some of these fealures allow you
lo increase your abilily scores, eilher increasing lwo
scores by I each or increasing one score by 2. You can't
increase an ability score above 20. In addilion, every
characler's proficiency bonus increases at certain leveIs.
Each time you gain a leveI, you gain I additional Hit
Oie. Roll lhal Hit Oie, add your Conslitulion modifier
to lhe roll, and add the total to your hit point maximum.
Alternatively, you can use lhe fixed value shown in your
c1ass enlry, which is the average resull of lhe die roll
(rounded up).
When your Conslilution modifier increases by I, your
hit poinl maximum increases by I for each leve! you have
allained. For exampIe, when Bruenor reaches 81h leveI
as a fighter, he increases his Conslilution score from 17
to 18, lhus increasing his Conslilulion modifier from +3
to +4. His hil point maximum lhen increases by 8.
The Character Advancement lable summarizes the
XP you need to advance in leveIs from leveI 1 lhrough
leveI 20, and lhe proficiency bonus for a characler of thal
leveI. Consull the informalion in your character's c1ass
description to see what olher improvements you gain
at each leveI.

TIERS OF PLAY
The shading in the Character Advancement (able shows
lhe four tiers of play. The tiers don't have any rules
associated wilh them; they are a general descriplion of how
the play experience changes as characters gain leveIs.
In lhe first lier (leveIs 1-4), characters are effeclively
apprentice adventurers. They are learning lhe features
that define lhem as members of parlicular classes,
including lhe major choices that flavor their c1ass
features as lhey advance (such as a wizard's Arcane
Tradition or a fighter's Marlial Archetype). The threats
they face are re!ative!y minor, usually posing a nanger lo
local farmsleads or villages.
In the second tier (leveIs 5-10), characlers come into
lheir own. Many spellcaslers gain access to 3rd-Ievel
spells aI lhe start of this tier, crossing a new threshold of
magical power with spells such as fireball and lightning
bolt. At lhis lier, many weapon-using classes gain the
abilily lOmake mulliple attacks in one round. These
charac(ers have become imporlanl, facing dangers thal
lhrealen cities and kingdoms.
In the third lier (leveIs 11-16), characlers have
reached a leveI of power that seIs lhem high ahove
the ordinary populace and makes them special even
among advenlurers. At 11th leveI, many spellcasters
gain access lo 6th-leveI spells, some of which create
effects previously impossible for player characters to
achieve. Olher characters gain fealures (hat allow (hem
lo make more attacks or do more impressive things with
those attacks. These mighty adventurers oflen confront
threals to whole regions and conlinents.
AI lhe fourth tier (leveIs 17-20), characters achieve
the pinnacle of lheir c1ass features, becoming heroic (or
villainous) archetypes in lheir own right. The fate of the
world or even lhe fundamental order of lhe multiverse
might hang in the balance during their adventures.
CHARACTER

AOVANCEMENT

Experience Po;nts

Levei

Proficiency Bonus

O

1

+2

300

2

+2

900

3

+2

2,700

4

+2

6,500

5

+3

14,000

6

+3

23,000

7

+3

34.000

8

+3

48,000

9

+4

64,000

10

+4

85,000

11

+4

100,000

12

+4

120,000

13

+5

140,000

14

+5

165,000

15

+5

195,000

16

+5

225,000

17

+6

265,000

18

+6

305,000

19

+6

355,000

20

+6

PART 1

STEP-BY-STEP {;HARA(TERS

'5

CHAPTER

2: RACES
"

I

VISITTOONEOfTHE GREATCITIESINTHE
worlds of OUNGEONS& ORAGONSWalerdeep, the Free Cily of Greyhawk, or
even uncanny Sigil, the City of Ooorsoverwhelms lhe senses. Voices chatter in
counlless differenl languages. The smells
of cooking in dozens of differenl cuisines
mingle with lhe odors of crowded slreels and poor
sanitalion. Buildings in myriad architeclural styles
display lhe diverse origins of their inhabilants.
And lhe people lhemselves-people
of varying size,
shape, and coloro dressed in a dazzling speclrum
of slyles and hues-represenl
many differenl races,
from diminulive halflings and stoul dwarves to
majeslically beauliful elves, mingling among a variety
of human ethnicities.
Scattered among lhe members of these more common
races are the lrue exolics: a hulking dragonborn here,
pushing his way lhrough lhe crowd, and a sly liefling
there, lurking in lhe shadows with mischief in her eyes.
A group of gnomes laughs as one of lhem activales a
clever wooden loy lhal moves of ils own accord. Halfelves and half-orcs live and work alongside humans,
without fully belonging to lhe races of eilher of lheir
parenls. And lhere, well oul of lhe sunlighl, is a lone
drow-a fugilive from lhe sublerranean expanse of
the Underdark, trying to make his way in a world
thal fears his kind.

RACIAL TRAITS
The descriplion of each race includes racial traits lhal
are common to members of lhal race. The following
entries appear among lhe lrails of most races.
ABILITY

SCORE INCREASE

Every race increases one or more of a characler's
abilily scores.
AGE

The age entry noles the age when a member of lhe race
is considered an adult, as well as the race's expected
lifespan. This informalion can help you decide how
old your characler is at lhe start of lhe game. Vou
can choose any age for your characler, which could
provide an explanation for some of your ability scores.
For example, if you play a young or very old character,
your age could explain a particularly low Strength or
Conslitulion score, while advanced age could accounl
for a high Inlelligence or Wisdom.
ALIGNMENT

Mosl races have tendencies loward cerlain alignments,
described in this entry. These are nol binding for player
characlers, bul considering why your dwarf is chaolic.
for example, in defiance of lawful dwarf society can help
you better define your characler,
SIZE

CHOOSING

A RACE

Humans are lhe most common people in lhe worlds of
0&0, bul they live and work alongside dwarves, elves,
halflings, and counlless olher fanlaslic species. Your
character belongs lo one of lhese peoples.
Nol every inlelligent race of lhe mulliverse is
appropriale for a player-conlrolled advenlurer. Owarves,
elves, halflings, and humans are the most common
races to produce the sorl of advenlurers who make up
lypical parlies. Oragonborn, gnomes, half-elves, halforcs, and lieflings are less common as adventurers.
Orow, a subrace of elves, are also uncommon.
Your choice of race affects many differenl aspecls of
your character. /t establishes fundamenlal qualities thal
exisl IhroughoUI your characler's adventuring career.
When making lhis decision, keep in mind lhe kind of
character you wanl lO play. For example, a halfling could
be a good choice for a sneaky rogue, a dwarf makes a
lough warrior, and an elf can be a maSler of arcane magic,
Your characler race nol only affecIs your abilily scores
and lrails bul also provides lhe cues for building your
characler's story. Each race's descriplion in lhis chapler
includes information to help you roleplay a characler of
lhal race, including personality, physical appearance,
features of sociely, and racial alignmenl lendencies.
These delails are suggeslions to help you think aboul
your characler; adventurers can deviate widely from lhe
norm for lheir race. /t's worthwhile to consider why your
character is differenl, as a helpful way to think aboul
your characler's background and personalily.

Characlers of mosl races are Medium, a size calegory
including creatures lhal are roughly 4 lo 8 feet la 11.
Members of a few races are Small (belween 2 and 4 feel
la 11),which means lhal cerlain rules of lhe game affecl
lhem differenlly. The mosl importanl of lhese rules
is lhal Small characters have lrouble wielding heavy
weapons, as explained in chapler 6.
SPEED

Your speed delermines how far you can move when
lraveling (chapler 8) and fighling (chapler 9).
LANGUAGES

By virtue of your race, your character can speak, read,
and wrlte cerlain languages. Chapler 4 lisls the mosl
common languages of lhe 0&0 multiverse.
SUBRACES

Some races have subraces. Members of a subrace
have lhe lrails of the parenl race in addition lo lhe
lrails specified for lheir subrace. Relationships among
subraces vary significantly from race lo race and
world to world. In the Oragonlance campaign setting,
for example, mountain dwarves and hill dwarves live
logelher as differenl clans of lhe same people, bul in
the Forgolten Realms, lhey live far aparl in separale
kingdoms and call lhemselves shield dwarves and
gold dwarves, respeclively.

PARTI I RACES

17

SHORT AND STOUT
Bold and hardy, dwarves are known as
skilled warriors, miners, and workers
of stone and melaI. Though lhey sland
well under 5 feel tall, dwarves are so
broad and compael lhal lhey can weigh
as much as a human slanding nearly lwo
feet laller. Their courage and endurance
are also easily a maleh for any of
lhe larger folk.
Owarven skin ranges from deep brown to a paler
hue linged wilh red, bul lhe most eommon shades are
lighl brown or deep lan, like cerlain lones of earlh.
Their hair, worn long bul in simple slyles, is usually
black, gray, or brown, lhough paler dwarves oflen have
red hair. Male dwarves value lheir beards highly and
groom lhem carefully.

LONG MEMORY, LONG GRUDGES

DWARF
"YER LATE, ELF!" CAME THE ROUGH EDGE OF A FAMILIAR

voice. Bruenor Battlehammer

walked up the back of his

deadfoe, disregardingthefact

that the heavy monster lay

on top ofhis elvenfriend.

In spite ofthe added discamfort,

the dwarf's long, pointed, often-broken

nose and gray-

streaked though still-fiery red beard came as a welcame
sight to Drizzt. "Knew I'dfindye

in trouble if I came out

an' lookedforyel"
-R. A. Salvatore, The Crystal Shard
Kingdoms rich in ancienI grandeur, halls carved into the
rools of mountains, lhe echoing of picks and hammers
in deep mines and blazing forges, a commitmenl 10
clan and lradilion, and a burning halred of goblins and
ores-lhese eommon lhreads unile ali dwarves.

18

PART I I RACES

Owarves can live to be more than 400 years old, so lhe
oldesl living dwarves often remember a very differenl
world. For example, some of lhe oldesl dwarves living
in Ciladel Felbarr (in lhe world of lhe Forgotten Realms)
can recall lhe day, more lhan three cenluries ago, when
ores conquered lhe forlress and drove lhem into an exile
lhal lasled over 250 years. This longevity granls lhem a
perspeclive on lhe world lhal shorter-lived races such as
humans and halflings lack.
Owarves are solid and enduring like the mounlains
they love, wealhering lhe passage of cenluries wilh stoic
endurance and little change. They respecl lhe lradilions
of lheir clans, lracing their anceslry back lo lhe
founding of lheir mosl ancienl slrongholds in lhe youth
of lhe world, and don'l abandon those lradilions lighlly.
ParI of lhose traditions is devolion lo lhe gods of lhe
dwarves, who uphold lhe dwarven ideais of induslrious
labor, skill in baltle, and devolion lo lhe forge.
Individual dwarves are determined and loyal, lrue lo
lheir word and decisive in action, somelimes lo lhe poinl
of ~tubbornness. Many dwarves have a strong sense

of justice, and they are slow to forget wrongs they have
suffered. A wrong dane to one dwarf is a wrong dane to
the dwarf's entire dan, so what begins as one dwarf's
hunt for vengeance can become a full-blown dan feudo

CLANS AND KINGDOMS
Dwarven kingdoms stretch deep beneath the mountains
where the dwarves mine gems and precious metais
and forge items of wonder. They love the beauty and
artistry of precious metais and fine jewelry, and in some
dwarves this lave festers into avarice. Whatever wealth
they can't find in their mountains, they gain through
trade. They dislike boats, so enterprising humans and
halflings frequently handle trade in dwarven goods
along water routes. Trustworthy members of other races
are welcome in dwarf settlements, though some areas
are off limits even to them.
The chief unit of dwarven society is the dan, and
dwarves highly value social standing. Even dwarves
who live far from their own kingdoms cherish their dan
identities and affiliations, recognize related dwarves,
and invoke their ancestors' names in oaths and curses.
To be danless is the worst fate that can befall a dwarf.
Dwarves in other lands are typically artisans,
especially weaponsmiths, armorers, and jewelers. Some
become mercenaries ar bodyguards, highly sought after
for their courage and loyalty.

GODS,

GOLD,

AND CLAN

Dwarves who take up the adventuring life might be
motivated bya desire for treasure-for its own sake, for
a specilic purpose, ar even out of an altruistic desire to
help others. Other dwarves are driven by the command
ar inspiration of a deity, a direct calling or simply a
desire to bring glory to one of the dwarf gods. Clan and
ancestry are also important motivators. A dwarf might
seek to restore a dan's lost honor, avenge an ancienl
wrong the dan suffered, ar earn a new place within the
dan after having been exiled. ar a dwarf might search
for the axe wielded bya mighty ancestor, lost on the lield
of battle centuries ago.

SLOW

TO TRUST

Dwarves gel along passably well wilh mosl olher races. "The
difference belween an acquainlance and a friend is aboul a
hundred years," is a dwarf saying lhal mighl be hyperbole,
bul cerlainly poinls lo how diflicull il can be for a member of
a shorl-lived race Iike humans lo eam a dwarf's lrusl.
Elves. "I!'s nol wise lo depend on lhe elves. No lelling whal
an elf will do nexl; when lhe hammer meels lhe orc's head,
lhey're as apllo slart singing as lo pull oul a sword. They're
fiighly and frivolous. Two lhings lo be said for lhem, lhough:
They don'l have many smilhs, bullhe ones lhey have do very
fine work. And when ores ar goblins come slreaming down
oul oflhe mounlains, an elf's good lo have aI your back. Nol
as good as a dwarf, maybe, bul no doubllhey hale lhe ores
as much as we do."
Half/ings. "Sure, lhey're pleasanl folk. Sul show me a
halfiing hera. An empire, a lriumphanl army. Even a lreasure
for lhe ages made by halfiing hands. NOlhing. How can you
lake lhem seriously?"
Humans. "You lake lhe lime lo gel lo know a human, and
by lhen lhe human's on her dealhbed. If you're lucky, she's
gol kin-a daughler ar granddaughler, maybe-who's gol
hands and hearl as good as hers. Tha!'s when you can make
a human friend. And walch lhem gol They sellheir hearts on
somelhing, lhey'll gel il, whelher i!'s a dragon's hoard ar an
empire's lhrone. You have lo admire lhal kind of dedicalion,
even if il gels lhem in lrouble more oflen lhan nol."

~

r

DWARF NAMES
A dwarf's na me is granted by a c1an elder, in accordance
with tradition, Every proper dwarven na me has been
used and reused down through the generations, A
dwarf's name belongs to the c1an, not to the individual.
A dwarf who misuses or brings shame to a c1an name
is stripped of the na me and forbidden by law to use any
dwarven name in its place,
Male Names: Adrik, Alberich, Baern, Barendd, Brottor,
Bruenor, Oain, Oarrak, Oelg, Eberk, Einkil, Fargrim,
Flint, Gardain, Harbek, Kildrak, Morgran, Orsik,
Oskar, Rangrim, Rurik, Taklinn, Thoradin, Thorin,
Tordek, Traubon, Travok, Ulfgar, Veit, Vondal
Female Names: Amber, Artin, Audhild, Bardryn,
Oagnal, Oiesa, Eldeth, Falkrunn, Finellen, Gunnloda,
Gurdis, Helja, Hlin, Kathra, Kristryd, lide, Liftrasa,
Mardred, Riswynn, Sannl, Torbera, Torgga, Vistra
Clan Names: Balderk, Battlehammer, Brawnanvil,
Oankil, Fireforge, Frostbeard, Gorunn, Holderhek,
Ironfist, Loderr, Lutgehr, Rumnaheim, Strakeln,
Torunn, Ungart

DWARF TRAITS
Your dwarf character has an assortment of inborn
abilities, part and parcel of dwarven nature.
Ability Seore Inerease. Your Constitution seore
increases by 2.
Age. Owarves mature at the same rate as humans, but
they're considered young until they reach the age of 50,
On average, they live about 350 years.
Alignment. Most dwarves are lawful, believing firmly
in the benefits of a well-ordered society. They tend
toward good as well, with a strong sense of fair play and
a belief that everyone deserves to share in the benefits of
a just order.
Size. Owarves stand between 4 and 5 feet tall and
average about 150 pounds. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feel. Your
speed is not reduced by wearing heavy armor.
Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. Vou
can see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were
bright light, and in darkness as if it were dim lighl. Vou
can't discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.
Dwarven Resilienee. Vou have advantage on saving
throws against poison, and you have resistance against
poison damage (explained in chapter 9).
Dwarven Combat Training. Vou have proficiency
with the battleaxe, handaxe, throwing hammer,
and warhammer.

20

PART

I

I RACES

TooJProficieney. Vou gain proficiency with the
artisan's tools of your choice: smith's tooIs, brewer's
supplies, or mason's tools.
Stoneeunning. Whenever you make an Intelligence
(History) check related to the origin of stonework, you
are considered proficient in the History skill and add
double your proficiency bonus to the check, instead of
your normal proficiency bonus.
Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
and Owarvish. Owarvish is full of hard consonants and
guttural sounds, and those characteristics spill over into
whatever other language a dwarf might speak.
Subraee. Two main subraces of dwarves populate the
worlds of 0&0: hill dwarves and mountain dwarves.
Choose one of these subraces.
HILL DWARF

As a hill dwarf, you have keen senses, deep intuition,
and remarkable resilience. The gold dwarves of Faenln
in their mighty southern kingdom are hill dwarves, as
are the exiled Neidar and the debased Klar of Krynn in
the Oragonlance setting.
Ability Seore Inerease. Your Wisdom score
increases by 1.
Dwarven Toughness. Your hit point maximum
increases by 1, and it increases by 1 every time you
gain a leveI.
MOUNTAIN

DWARF

As a mountain dwarf, you're strong and hardy,
accustomed to a difficult life in rugged terrain. You're
probably on the tall side (for a dwarf), and tend toward
lighter coloration, The shield dwarves of northern
Faerun, as well as the ruling Hylar c1an and the noble
Oaewar c1an of Oragonlance, are mountain dwarves.
Ability Seore Inerease. Your Strength score
increases by 2.
Dwarven Armor Training. Vou have proficiency with
light and medium armor.

••

DUERGAR

In cities deep in the Underdark live the duergar, ar gray
dwarves. These vicious, stealthy slave traders raid lhe surface
world for caplives, lhen sell lheir prey lo lhe olher races of
lhe Underdark. They have innale magical abililies lo beco me
invisible and lo lemporarily grow lo gianl size.

ELF
"I HAVE NEVER IMAGINED SUCH BEAUTY EXISTED,"

Goldmoon said soft!)'. The day's march had been difficult.
but the reward at the end was beyond their dreams.
The companions stood on a high cliff over thefabled
city of Qualinost.
Four slender spires rasefrom the city's corners like glistening spindles, their brilliant white stone marbled with shining

silver. Graceful arches. swoopingfrom spire to spire, soared
through the air. Crafted by ancient dwarven metalsmiths.
they were strongenough to hold the weight of an army,yet
they appeared so delicate that a bird lighting on them might
overthraw the balance, These glistening arches were the
city's on!)' boundaries; there was no wall around Qualinost.
The elven city opened its arms loving!)' to the wilderness.
-Margaret

Weis & Tracy Hickman,
Dragons of Autumn Twilight

Elves are a magical people of otherworldly grace, living
in the world but not entirely part of it. They live in
places of ethereal beauty, in the midst of ancient forests
ar in silvery spires glittering with faerie light, where
soft music drifts through the air and gentle fragrances
waft on the breeze. Elves lave nature and magic, art
and artistry, music and poetry, and the good things
of the world.

females are about the same height, and males are only
marginaIly heavier than females.
Elves' coloration encompasses the normal human
range and also includes skin in shades of copper,
bronze, and almost bluish-white, hair of green ar blue,
and eyes like pools of liquid gold ar silver. Elves have no
facial and little body hair. They favor elegant c10thing in
bright colors, and they enjoy simple yet lovely jewelry,

SLENDER AND GRACEFUL

A TIMELESS

With their unearthly grace and fine features, elves
appear hauntingly beautiful to humans and members
of many other races. They are slightly shorter than
humans on average, ranging from well under 5 feet
tall to just over 6 feet. They are more slender than
humans, weighing only 100 to 145 pounds. Males and

Elves can live weIl over 700 years, giving them a broad
perspective on events that might trouble the shorterlived races more deeply, They are more often amused
than excited, and more likely to be curious than
greedy. They tend to remain aloof and unfazed by petty
happenstance. When p"rs"ing a goal, however, whether

PERSPECTIVE

PART tRACES
21

adventuring on a mission or learning a new skill or art,
elves can be focused and relentless. They are slow to
make friends and enemies, and even slower to forget
them. They reply to petty insults with disdain and to
serious insults with vengeance.
Like the branches of a young tree, elves are f1exible
in the face of danger. They trust in diplomacy and
compromise to resolve differences before they escalate
to violence. They have been known to retreat from
intrusions into their woodland homes, confident
that they can simply wait the invaders oul. But when
the need arises, elves reveal a stern martial side,
demonstrating skill wilh sword, bow, and strategy.

HIDDEN

WOODLAND

REALMS

Most elves dwell in small forest villages hidden among
the trees. Elves hunt game, gather food, and grow
vegetables, and their skill and magie allow them to
support themselves without the need for clearing and
plowing land. They are talented artisans, crafting finely
worked clothes and art objects. Their contact with
outsiders is usually limited, though a few elves make a
good living by trading crafted items for metais (which
thcy have no interest in mining).
Elves encountered outside their own lands are
commonly traveling minstrels, artists, or sages. Human
nobles compete for lhe services of elf instructors to
teach swordplay or magie to their children.

EXPLORATION

AND ADVENTURE

EI\'es lake up advenluring out of wanderlust. Since
they are so long-lived, they can enjoy centuries of
exploration and discovery. They dislike lhe pace of
human society, whieh is regimenled from day lo day but
constantly changing over deeades, so lhey find careers
that let them travei freely and set their own pace. Elves
also enjoy exercising their martial prowess or gaining
greatcr magical power, and adventuring allo\Vs them
PART

22

I

I RACES

to do so. Some mlght join with rebels fighting against
oppression, and others might become champions of
moral causes.

ELF NAMES
Elves are considered children until they declare
themselves adults, some time after the hundredth
birthday, and before this period they are called
by child names.
On declaring adulthood, an elf selects an adult name,
although those who knew him or her as a youngster
mlght continue to use the child name. Each elf's adult
na me is a uni que creation, though It might reflect
the names of respected individuaIs or other family
members. Little distinction exists between male
names and female names; the groupings here reflect
only general tendencies. In addition, every elf bears a
family na me, typieally a comblnation of other Elvish
words. Some elves traveling among humans translate
their family names into Common, but others retain the
Elvish version.
Child Names: Ara, Bryn, Del, Eryn, Faen, Innil,
Lael, Mella, Naill, Naeris, Phann, Rael, Rinn, Sai,
Syllin, Thia, Vali
Male Adult Names: Adran, Aelar, Aramil, Arannis,
Aust, Beiro, Berrian, Carrie, Enialis, Erdan, Erevan,
Galinndan, Hadarai, Heian, Himo. Immeral, Ivellios,
Laucian, Mindartis, Paelias, Peren, Quarion, Riardon,
Rolen, Soveliss, Thamior, Tharivol, Theren, Varis

'.;,.

HAUGHTY

BUT GRACIOUS

Although they can be haughty, elves are generally gracious
even to those who fali short of their high expectationswhich is most non.elves. 5till, they can find good in just
about anyone.
Dwarves. "Dwarves are dull, c1umsy oafs. But what they
lack in humor, sophistication, and manners, they make up in
valor. And I must admit, their best smiths produce art that
approaches elven quality."
Haljlings. "Halflings are people of simple pleasures, and
that is not a quality to scorn. lhey're good folk, they care
for each other and tend their gardens, and they have proven
themselves tougher than they seem when the need arises."
Humans. "Ali that haste, their ambition and drive to
accomplish something before their brieflives pass awayhuman endeavors seem 50 futile sometimes. But then
you look at what they have accomplished, and you have to
appreciate their achievements. If only they could slow down
and learn some refinement."

~

,

Female Adult Names: Adrie, Althaea, Anastrianna,
Andraste, Antinua, Bethrynna, Birel, Caelynn,
Orusilia, Enna, Felosial, lelenia,jelenneth, Keyleth,
Leshanna, Lia, Meriele, Mialee, Naivara, Quelenna,
Quillathe, Sariel, Shanairra, Shava, Silaqui,
Theirastra, Thia, Vadania, Valanthe, Xanaphia
Fami1y Names (Common Translations): Amakiir
(Gemflower), Amastacia (Starflower), Galanodel
(Moonwhisper), Holimion (Oiamonddew), IIphelkiir
(Gemblossom), Liadon (Silverfrond), Meliamne
(Oakenheel), Nailo (Nightbreeze), Siannodel
(Moonbrook), Xiloscient (Goldpetal)

ELF TRAITS
Your elf character has a variety of natural abilities, the
result of thousands of years of elven refinemenl.
Ability Score Increase. Your Oexterity score
increases by 2.
Age. AIthough elves reach physical maturity at about
the same age as humans, the elven understanding of
adulthood goes beyood physical growth to eocompass
worldly experience. Ao elf typically c1aims adulthood
aod ao adult name arouod the age of 100 aod cao live
to be 750 years old.
Alignment. Elves love freedom, variety, aod selfexpressioo, so they lean stroogly toward the geotler
aspects of chaos. They value aod protect others'
freedom as well as their owo, aod they are more
often good thao 001. The drow are ao exceptioo; their
exile ioto the Uoderdark has made them vicious aod
daogerous. Orow are more often evil thao oot.
Size. Elves raoge from under 5 to over 6 feet tall aod
have sleoder builds. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walkiog speed is 30 feel.
Darkvision. Accustomed to twilit forests and the oight
sky, you have superior vision io dark aod dim cooditioos.
Vou cao see io dim light withio 60 feet of you as if it
were bright light, aod io darkness as if it were dim lighl.
Vou cao'l discero color io darkoess, ooIy shades of gray. ,
Keen Senses. Vou have proficieocy io the
Perceptioo skill.
Fey Ancestry. Vou have advaolage 00 saviog throws
agaiost beiog charmed, and magic cao't put you to sleep.

Trance. Elves doo't need to sleep. Ioslead, lhey
meditate deeply, remainiog semicooscious, for 4
hours a day. (The Commoo word for such meditatioo
is "traoce.") While meditatiog, you cao dream after a
fashioo; such dreams are actually meotal exercises that
have beco me reflexive through years of practice. Afler
resliog io lhis way, you gaio lhe same beoefit that a
humao does from 8 hours of sleep.
Languages. Vou cao speak, read, and write Common
aod Elvish. Elvish is fluid, wilh subtle iotonatioos aod
iotricate grammar. Elveo literature is rich aod varied,
aod their soogs aod poems are famous among other
races. Maoy bards learo lheir laoguage so lhey cao add
Elvish ballads lo lheir repertoires.
Subrace. Aocieot divides amoog the elveo people
resulled in lhree maio subraces: high elves, wood elves,
aod dark elves, who are commooly called drow. Choose
ooe of lhese subraces. lo some worlds, these subraces
are divided slill further (such as lhe suo e1ves and mooo
elves of the Forgotteo Realms), so if you wish, you can
choose a oarrower subrace.
HIGH ELF

As a high elf, you have a keeo mind and a mastery of
at least lhe basics of magic. In many of the worlds
of 0&0, lhere are two kinds of high elves. Ooe lype
(which includes lhe gray e1ves aod valley elves of
Greyhawk, the Silvaoesti of Oragoolaoce, and lhe
sun elves of lhe Forgotteo Realms) is haughty and
reclusive, believing lhemselves to be superior lo
ooo-elves and even other elves. The other type
(iocludiog the high elves of Greyhawk. the
Qualinesli of Oragonlance, and the moon elves
of the Forgotteo Realms) are more common
and more friendly, and oflen encouolered
among humans and olhe r races.
The sun elves of Faeruo (also called gold
elves or sunrise elves) have bronze skin and
hair of copper, black, or golden blood. Thcir
eyes are golden, silver, or black. Moon elves (also
called silver elves or gray elves) are much paler,
with alabasler skio somelimes tioged wilh blue.
They oflen have hair of silver-while, black, or blue,
but various shades of blond, brown, and red are
not uncommon. Their eyes are blue or green and
flecked with gold.
Ability Score Increase. Your lotelligeoce score
iocreases by I.
ElfWeapon Training. Vou have proficiency with
lhe longsword, shortsword, shortbow, and longbow.

P'\RTl

(t-S

Cantrip. Vou know one Canlrip of your choice from
lhe wizard spelllisl. Inlelligence is your spellcasling
abilily for il.
',."
Extra Language. Vou can speak, read, and wrile one
exlra language of your choice.
WOOD ELF

As a wood elf, you have keen senses and inluilion, and
your fleel feel carry you quickly and sleallhily lhrough
your nalive foresls. This calegory includes lhe wild
elves (grugach) of Greyhawk and lhe Kagonesli of
Dragonlance, as well as lhe races called wood elves in
Greyhawk and lhe Forgolten Realms. [n Faenln, wood
elves (also called wild elves. green elves, or foresl elves)
are reclusive and dislrusling of non-elves.
Wood elves' skin lends lo be copperish in hue,
somelimes wilh lraces of green. Their hair lends loward
browns and blacks, bul il is occasionally blond or
copper-colored. Their eyes are green, brown, or hazel.
Ability Score Increase. Your Wisdom score
increases by 1.
ElfWeapon Training. Vou have proficiency wilh lhe
longsword, shorlsword, shorlbow, and longbow.
F1eet ofFoot. Your base walking speed
increases lo 35 feel.
Mask ofthe Wild. Vou can altempllo hide even when
you are only lighlly obscured by foliage, heavy rain,
falling snow, misl, and olher nalural phenomena.

DARK ELF (DROW)

Descended from an earlier subrace of dark-skinned
elves; lhedrow were banished from lhe surface world
for following lhe goddess Lollh down lhe palh lo
evil and corruplion. Now lhey have builllheir own
civilizalion in lhe deplhs of lhe Underdark, palterned
afler lhe Way of Lollh. Also called dark elves. lhe drow
have black skin lhal resemb[es polished obsidian and
slark while ar pale yellow hair. They commonly have
very pale eyes (so pale as lObe mislaken for while) in
shades of lilac, silver, pink, red, and blue. They lend lo
be smaller and lhinner lhan mosl elves.
Drow advenlurers are rare, and lhe race does nol exisl
in ali worlds. Check wilh your Dungeon Masler lo see
if you can play a drow characler.
Ability Score Increase. Your Charisma score
increases by 1.
Superior Darkvision. Your darkvision has a
radius of 120 feel.
SunJight Sensitivity. Vou have disadvanlage on altack
rolls and on Wisdom (Perceplion) checks lhal rely on
sighl when you, lhe largel of your altack, ar whalever
you are trying to perceive is in direcl sunlighl.
Drow Magic. Vou know lhe dancing Jights canlrip.
When you reach 3rd levei, you can casllhe faerie tire
spell once per day. When you reach 51h levei, you can
also casl lhe darkness spell once per day. Charisma is
your spellcasling abilily for lhese spells.
Drow Weapon Training. Vou have proficiency with
rapiers, shorlswords, and hand crossbows.
4
THE

,
DARKNEss

OF THE DRow

Were il nol for one renowned exceplion, lhe race of drow
would be universally reviled. lo mosl, lhey are a race of
demon-worshiping marauders dwelling in lhe sublerranean
deplhs of lhe Underdark, emerging only on lhe blackesl
nighls lo pillage and slaughler lhe surface dwellers lhey
despi se. lheir sociely is depraved and preoccupied wilh lhe
favor of Lollh, lheir spider-goddess, who sanclions murder
and lhe exlerminalion of enlire families as noble houses
vie for posilion.
Yel one drow, alleasl, broke lhe mold. In lhe world of lhe
Forgotten Realms, Drizzl Do'Urden, ranger of lhe North, has
proven his qualily as a good-hearted defender of lhe weak
and innocent. Rejecling his herilage and adrift in a world lhal
looks upon him wilh lerror and loalhing, Drizzl is a model
for lhose few drow who follow in his foolsleps, lrying lo find
a life apart from lhe evil sociely oflheir Underdark homes.
Drow grow up believing lhal surface-dwelling races are
inferior, worlhless excepl as slaves. Drow who develop a
conscience or find il necessary lo cooperale wilh members of
olher races find il hard lo overcome lhal prejudice, especially
when lhey are 50 often on lhe receiving end of halred.

The comforts of home are the goals of most halflings'
lives: a place to settle in peace and quiet, far from
marauding monsters and clashing armies; a blazing tire
and a generous meal; fine drink and fine conversation.
Though some halflings live out their days in remote .
agricultural communities, others form nomadic bands
that travei constantly, lured by the open road and the
wide horizon to discover the wonders of new lands and
peoples. But even these wanderers love peace, food,
hearth, and home, though home might be a wagon
jostling along an dirt road or a raft floating downriver.

SMALL ANO PRACTICAL

HALFLING
REGIS THE HALFLING,

THE ONLY ONE OF HIS KIND FOR

hundreds ofmiles in a1lY direction, /ocked hisfmgers behind his head and /eaned back against the mos~ b/anket
of the tree trunk. Regis was short, even by the standards
of his diminutive roce, with the fluff of his curfy brawn
/ocks barefy cresting the three-foot mark, but his be/fy was

The diminutive halflings survive in a world full of larger
creatures by avoiding notice or, barring that, avoiding
offense. Standing about 3 feet tall, they appear re1atively
harmless and so have managed to survive for centuries
in the shadow of empires and on the edges of wars and
political strife. They are inclined to be stout, weighing
between 40 and 45 pounds.
Halflings' skin ranges from tan to pale with a ruddy
cast, and their hair is usually brown or sandy brown
and wavy. They have brown or hazel eyes. Halfling men
often sport long sideburns, but beards are rare among
them and mustaches even more so. They like to wear
simple, comfortable, and practical clothes, favoring
bright colors.
Halfling practicality extends beyond their clothing.
They're concerned with basic needs and simple
pleasures and have little use for ostentation. Even the
wealthiest of halflings keep their treasures locked in a
cellar rather than on display for ali to see. They have
a knack for finding the most straightforward solution
to a problem, and have little patience for dithering.

ampfy thickened by his love of a good mea/, ar severa/, as
the opportunities

presented themse/ves. The crooked stick

that served as hisfishingpole

rase up above him, c/enched

between two ofhis toes, and hungout

over the quiet /ake,

mirrared perfectfy in the glas~ surface of Maer Dua/don.
-R.A. Salvatore, The Crysta/ Shard

PART I

I RACES

KINO ANO CURIOUS
Halflings are an affable and cheerful people. They
cherish the bonds of family and friendship as well
as the comforts of hearth and home, harboring few
dreams of gold or glory. Even adventurers among
them usually venture into the world for reasons of

AFFABLE

community, friendship, wanderlust, ar curiosity. They
lave discovering new things, even sim pie things, such
as an exotic food ar an unfamiliar style of c1othing.
Halflings are easily moved to pity and hate to see any
living thing suffer. They are generous, happily sharing
what they have even in lean times.

BLEND INTO THE CROWD
Halflings are adept at fitting into a community of
humans, dwarves, ar elves, making themselves valuable
and weJcome. The combination of their inherent stealth
and their unassuming nature helps halflings to avoid
unwanted attention.
Halflings work readily with others, and they are loyal
to their friends, whether halfling ar otherwise. They can
display remarkable ferocity when their friends, families,
ar communities are threatened.

PASTORAL PLEASANTRIES
Most halflings live in small, peaceful communities with
large farms and well-kept graves. They rarely build
kingdoms of their own ar even hold much land beyond
their quiet shires. They typically don't recognize any
sort of halfling nobility ar royalty, instead looking to
family elders to guide them. Families preserve their
traditional ways despite the rise and fali of empires.
Many halflings live among other races, where the
halflings' hard work and loyal outlook offer them
abundant rewards and creature comforts. Some halfling
communities travei as a way of life, driving wagons ar
guiding boats from place to place and maintaining no
permanent home.

AN D POSITIVE

Halflings lry lo gel along wilh everyone else and are loalh lo
make sweeping generalizalions-especially
negative ones.
Dwarves. "Dwarves make loyal friends, and you can counl
on lhem lo keep lheir word. Bul would il hurt lhem lo smile
once in a whilel"
Elves. "They're 50 beauliful! Their faces, lheir music, lheir
grace and alI. 11'5 like they slepped oul of a wonderful dream.
Bul lhere's no lelling what's going on behind lheir smiling
faces-surely more lhan lhey ever let on."
Humans. "Humans are a 101 like us, really. AI leasl some
of Ih em are. 51ep oul of lhe caslles and keeps, go lalk lo lhe
farmers and herders and you'll find good, solid folk. Nol lhal
lhere's anylhing wrong wilh lhe barons and soldiers-you
have lo admire lheir conviclion. And by prolecling lheir own
lands, lhey prolecl us as well."

••

EXPLORING

•••
OPPORTUNITIES

Halflings usually seI out on the adventurer's path lo
defend lheir communities, support their friends, or
explore a wide and wonder-filled world. For them,
adventuring is less a career than an opportunity or
sometimes a necessity.

HALFLING

NAMES

A halfling has a given name, a family name, and possibly
a nickname. Family names are often nicknames that
stuck so tenaciously they have been passed down
through the generations.
Male Names: Alton, Ander, Cade, Corrin, Eldon, Errich,
Finnan, Garret, Lindal, Lyle, Merric, Milo, Osborn,
Perrin, Reed, Roscoe, Wellby
Female Names: Andry, Bree, Callie, Cora, Euphemia,
jillian, Kithri, Lavinia, Lidda, Merla, Nedda, Paela,
Portia, Seraphina, Shaena, Trym, Vani, Verna
Family Names: Brushgather, Goodbarrel, Greenbottle,
High-hill, Hilltopple, Leagallow, Tealeaf, Thorngage,
Tosscobble, Underbough

PART

I I RACES

27

HALFLING

TRAITS

Your halfling character has a number of traits in
common with ali other halflings.
AbiJity Score Increase. Your Dexterity score
increases by 2.
Age. A halfling reaches adulthood at the age of
20 and generally lives into the middle of his or her
second century.
Alignment. Most halflings are lawful good. As a rule,
they are good-hearted and kind, hate to see others in
pain, and have no tolerance for oppression. They are
also very orderly and traditional, leaning heavily on
the support of their community and the comfort of
their old ways.
Size. Halflings average about 3 feet tall and weigh
about 40 pounds. Your size is Small.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feel.
Lucky. When you roll a 1 on an attack roll, ability
check, or saving throw, you can reroll the die and must
use the new roll.
Brave. Vou have advantage on saving throws against
being frightened.
Halfling Nimbleness. Vou can move through the
space of any creature that is of a size larger than yours.

Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
and Halfling. The Halfling language isn't secret, but
halflings are loath to share it with others. They write
very little, so they don't have a rich body of literature.
Their oral tradition. however, is very strong. Almost ali
halflings speak Common to converse with the people
in whose lands they dwell or through which they .
are traveling.
Subrace. The two main kinds of halfling. lightfoot and
stout, are more like closely related families than true
suhraces. Choose one of these subraces.
LIGHTFOOT

As a lightfoot halfling, you can easily hide from notice,
even using other people as cover. You're inclined to be
affable and get along well with others. In the Forgotten
Realms, lightfoot halflings have spread the farthest and
thus are the most common variety.
Lightfoots are more prone to wanderlust than other
halflings. and often dwell alongside other races or take
up a nomadic life. In the world of Greyhawk. these
halflings are called hairfeet or tallfellows.
AbiJity Score Increase. Your Charisma score
increases by 1.
Naturally Stealthy. Vou can attempt to hide even
when you are obscured only by a creature that is at least
one size larger than you.
STOUT

As a stout halfling. you're hardier than average and have
some resistance to poison. Some say that stouts have
dwarven blood. In the Forgotten Realms, these halflings
are called stronghearts. and they're most common
in the south.
AbiJity Score Increase. Your Constitution score
increases by 1.
Stout Resilience. Vou have advantage on saving
throws against poison, and you have resistance
against poison damage.

PART I

I RACES

•

HUMAN
THESE WERE THE STORIES OF A RESTLESS PEOPLE WHO

long ago took to the seas and rivers in longboats.jirst

to

pillage and terrorize, then to settle. Yet there was an energy.
a love of adventure. that sangfrom

every page. Long into

the night Liriel read. lighting candle after precious candle.
She'd never given much thought to humans. but these
storiesfascinated

her. In theseyellowed

pages were tales of

bold heroes. strange andjierce animais. mighty primitive gods.
and a magic that was part andfabric ofthat distant land.
-Elaine

Cunningham.

Daughterofthe

Drow

In the reckonings of most worlds. humans are the
youngest of the common races. late to arrive on the
world scene and short-lived in comparison to dwarves.
elves. and dragons. Perhaps it is because of their shorter
lives that they strive to achieve as much as they can in
the years they are given. Or maybe they feel they have
something to prove to the elder races. and that's why
they build their mighty empires on the foundation of
conquest and trade. Whatever drives them. humans
are the innovators. the achievers. and the pioneers
of the worlds.

A BROAD SPECTRUM
With their penchant for migration and conquest.
humans are more physically diverse than other common
races. There is no typical humano An individual can
stand from 5 feet to a little over 6 feet tall and weigh
fram 125 to 250 pounds. Human skin shades range
fram nearly black to very pale. and hair colors from
black to blond (curly. kinky. or straight); males might
sport facial hair that is sparse or thick. A lot of humans
have a dash of nonhuman blood. revealing hints of elf.
ore, or other lineages. Humans reach adulthood in their
late teens and rarely live even a single century.

VARIETY IN ALL THINGS
Humans are the most adaptable and ambitious people
among the common races. They have widely varying
tastes, morais, and customs in the many different lands
where they have settled. When they settle, though,
they stay: they build cities to last for the ages, and
great kingdoms that can persist for long centuries. An
individual human might have a relatively short life span,
but a human nation or culture preserves traditions
with origins far beyond the reach of any single human's
memory. They live fully in the present-making
them
well suited to the adventuring life-but also plan for the
future, striving to leave a lasting legacy. Individually and
as a group, humans are adaptable opportunists, and
they stay alert to changing political and social dynamics.
PART

I I RACES

EVERYONE'S

SECONO-BEST

FRIENOS

Just as readily as they mix with each other, humans mingle
with members of other races. They get along with almost
everyone, though they might not be close to many. Humans
serve as ambassadors,
diplomats,
magistrates,
merchants,
and functionaries
of ali kinds.
Dwa,ves. "They're stout folk, stalwart friends, and true to
their word. Their greed for gold is their downfall, though."
Elves. "ll's best not to wander into elven woods. They don't
like intruders, and you'll as likely be bewitched as peppered
with arrows. 5till, if an elf can get past that damned racial
pride and actually treat you like an equal, you can leam a lot
from them."
Ha/flings. "ll's hard to beat a meal in a halfling home, as
long as you don't crack your head on the ceiling-good
food
and good stories in front of a nice, warm fire. Ifhalflings had
a shred of ambition, they might really amount to something."

~

~

LASTING INSTITUTIONS
Where a single elf or dwarf might take on the
responsibility of guarding a speciallocation or a
powerful secret, humans found sacred orders and
institutions for such purposes. While dwarf c1ans and
halfling elders pass on the ancient traditions to each
new generation, human temples, governments, Iibraries,
and codes of law fix their lradilions in lhe bedrock of
history. Humans dream of immorlality, but (excepl for
lhose few who seek undeath or divine ascension to
escape dealh's c1utches) they achieve il by ensuring that
they will be remembered when lhey are gone.
Allhough some humans can be xenophobic, in
generallheir societies are inclusive. Human lands
welcome large numbers of nonhumans compared lo the
proporlion of humans who live in nonhuman lands.

EXEMPLARS OF AMBITION
Humans who seek advenlure are lhe mosl daring and
ambilious members of a daring and ambilious race.
They seek to earn glory in the eyes of lheir fellows
by amassing power, wealth, and fame. More than
olhe r people, humans champion causes rather lhan
lerritories or groups.

HUMAN

NAMES AND ETHNICITIES

Having so much more variely than olher cullures,
humans as a whole have no typical names. Some human

PART

3°

t

I RACES

parents give their children names from olher languages,
such as Dwarvish or Elvish (pronounced more or less
correctly), bul mosl parenls give names that are Iinked
lo their region's cullure or lo lhe naming lraditions of
their ancestors.
The malerial cullure and physical characleristics
of humans can change wildly from region lo region.
In the Forgolten Realms, for example, lhe c101hing,
archileclure, cuisine, music, and Iilerature are different
in lhe norlhwestern lands of lhe Silver Marches than
in dislanl Turmish or Impillur to the easl-and even
more dislinclive in far-off Kara-Tur. Human physical
characleristics, lhough, vary according lOlhe ancient
migrations of lhe earliesl humans, so lhallhe humans
of the Silver Marches have every possible varialion of
coloralion and features.
In the Forgotten Realms, nine human elhnic groups
are widely recognized, lhough over a dozen olhers are
found in more localized areas of Faerun. These groups,
and lhe lypical names of lheir members, can be used as
inspiralion no matter which world your human is in.
CALISHITE

Shorler and slighler in build than mos I olher humans,
Calishites have dusky brown skin, hair, and eyes.
They're found primarily in soulhwest Faerun.
Calishite Names: (Male) Aseir, Bardeid, Haseid.
Khemed. Mehmen. Sudeiman, Zasheir; (female)
Alala, Ceidil. Hama, Jasmal, Meilil, Seipora, Yasheira,
Zasheida; (surnames) Basha, Dumein,Jassan, Khalid.
Moslana. Pashar, Rein
CHONDATHAN

Chondalhans are slender, lawny-skinned folk wilh
brown hair that ranges from almosl blond lo almost
black. Most are tall and have green or brown eyes,
but lhese trails are hardly universal. Humans of
Chondalhan descenl dominale the centrallands of
Faerun, around the Inner Sea.

Chondathan Names: (Male) Darvin, Dorn, Evendur,
Gorstag, Grim, Helm, Malark, Morn, Randal,
Stedd; (female) Arveene, Esvele, jhessail, Kerri,
Lureene, Miri, Rowan, Shandri, Tessele; (surnames)
Amblecrown, Buckman, Dundragon, Evenwood,
Greycastle, Tallstag

SHOU
The Shou are the most numerous and powerful ethnic
groJ in Kara-Tur, far to the east of Faerún. They are
yellowish-bronze in hue, with black hair and dark
eyes. Shou surnames are usually presented before
the given name.

DAMARAN

Shou Names: (Male) An, Chen, Chi, Fai, jiang, Jun,
Lian, Long, Meng, On, Shan, Shui, Wen; (female)
Bai, Chao,jia, Lei, Mei, Qiao, Shui, Tai; (surnames)
Chien, Huang, Kao, Kung, Lao, Ling, Mei, Pin, Shin,
Sum, Tan, Wan

Found primarily in the northwest of Faerún, Damarans
are of moderate height and build, with skin hues
ranging from tawny to fair. Their hair is usually brown
ar black, and their eye colar varies widely, though brown
is most common.
Damaran Names: (Male) Bar, Fadei, Glar, Grigor,
Igan, Ivor, Kosef, MivaI, Orei, Pavel, Sergor; (female)
Alethra, Kara, Katernin, Mara, Natali, Olma, Tana,
Zora; (surnames) Bersk, Chernin, Dotsk, Kulenov,
Marsk, Nemetsk, Shemov, Starag
ILLUSKAN

p

TETHYRIAN

Widespread along the entire Sword Coast at the
western edge of Faerún, Tethyrians are of medium build
and height, with dusky skin that tends to grow fairer
the farther north they dwell. Their hair and eye colar
varies widely, but brown hair and blue eyes are the most
common. Tethyrians primarily use Chondathan names.

IIluskans are tall, fair-skinned folk with blue ar steely
gray eyes. Most have raven-black hair, but those who
inhabit the extreme northwest have blond, red, ar
light brown hair.

TURAMI

I1Iuskan Names: (Male) Ander, Blath, Bran, Frath,
Geth, Lander, Luth, Malcer, Stor, Taman, Urth;
(female) Amafrey, Betha, Cefrey, Kethra, Mara, Olga,
Silifrey, Westra; (surnames) Brightwood, Helder.
Hornraven, Lackman, Stormwind. Windrivver

Turami Names: (Male) Anton, Diero. Marcon, Pieron,
Rimardo, Romero, Salazar, Umbero; (female) Balama,
Dona, Faila,jalana, Luisa, Marta, Quara, Selise,
Vonda; (surnames) Agosto, Astorio, Calabra, Domine,
Falone, Marivaldi, Pisacar, Ramondo

MULAN

HUMAN TRAITS

Dominant in the eastern and southeastern shores of
the lnner Sea, the Mulan are generally tall, slim, and
amber-skinned, with eyes of hazel ar brown. Their hair
ranges from black to dark brown, but in the lands where
the Mulan are most prominent, nobles and many other
Mulan shave of[ ali their hair.
Mulan Names: (Male) Aoth, Bareris, Ehput-Ki,
Kethoth, Mumed, Ramas, So-Kehur, Thazar-De,
Urhur; (female) Arizima, Chathi, Nephis, Nulara,
Murithi, Sefris, Thola, Umara, Zolis; (surnames)
Ankhalab, Anskuld, Fezim, Hahpet, Nathandem,
Sepret, Uuthrakt
RASHEMI

Most often found east of the Inner Sea and often
intermingled with the Mulan, Rashemis tend to be short,
stout, and muscular. They usually have dusky skin, dark
eyes, and thick black hair.
Rashemi Names: (Male) Borivik, Faurgar,jandar,
Kanithar, Madislak, Ralmevik, Shaumar, Vladislak;
(female) Fyevarra, Hulmarra, Immith, Imzel,
Navarra, Shevarra, Tammith, Yuldra; (surnames)
Chergoba, Dyernina, Iltazyara, Murnyethara,
Stayanoga, Ulmokina

Native to the southern shore of the Inner Sea, the
Turami people are generally tall and muscular, with
dark mahogany skin, curly black hair, and dark eyes.

It's hard to make generalizations about humans, but
your human character has these traits.
Ability Score Increase. Your ability scores each
increase by I.
Age. Humans reach adulthood in their late teens and
live less than a century.
AJignment. Humans tend toward no
particular alignment. The best and the worst are
found among them.
Size. Humans vary widely in height and build, from
barely 5 feet to well over 6 feet tall. Regardless of your
position in that range. your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 fee!.
Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
and one extra language of your choice. Humans typically
learn the languages of other peoples they deal with,
including obscure dialects. They are fond of sprinkling
their speech with words borrowed from other tongues:
Orc curses, Elvish musical expressions, Dwarvish
military phrases, and so on.

••

VARIANT

HUMAN

••

TRAITS

If your eampaign uses the optional feat rules fram ehapter 5,
your Dungeon Master might allow these varianttraits, ali of
whieh replaee the human's Ability Seore Inerease trai!.
Ability Score Increase. Two different ability seores of your
ehoiee inerease by l.
Skills. Vou gain profieieney in one skill ofyour ehoiee.
Feat. Vou gain one feat of your ehoiee.

PART 1

RACES

3'

For al/ her life, Farideh had known that reading her
father'sface

was a skill she'd beenfortunate

to learn. A

human who couldn't spot the shift of her eyes or Havilar's
would certain(y see on(y the indifference of a dragon in
Clanless Mehen'sface.

But the shift of scales, the arch of a

ridge, the set of his eyes, the gape of his teeth-her father's
face spoke volumes.
But every scale of it, this time, seemed complete(y stil/the indifference of a dragon, even to Farideh.
-Erin

M. Evans, TheAdversary

Born of dragons, as their na me proclaims, the
dragonborn walk proudly through a world that greets
them with fearful incomprehension. Shaped by draconic
gods OI' the dragons themselves, dragonborn originally
hatched from dragon eggs as a unique race, combining
the best attributes of dragons and humanoids. Some
dragonborn are faithful servants to true dragons, others
form the ranks of soldiers in great wars, and still others
find themselves adrift, with no clear calling in life.

PROUD DRAGON KIN

DRAGONBORN
HER FATHER STOOD ON THE FIRST OF THE THREE STAIRS

that led dawnfrom

the parta I, unmoving. The scales of his

face had grown paler around the edges, but Clanless Mehen
stil/ looked as if he could wrestle down a dire bear himseif. Hisfamiliar wel/-worn armor was gone, replaced by
violet-tinted scale armor with bright silvery tracings. There
was a blazon on his arm as wel/, the mark of someforeign
house. The sword at his back was the same, though, the one
he had carried since even before he hadfound
in swaddling at the gates of Arush Vayem.

32

PART 1 I RACES

the twins left

Dragonborn look very much like dragons standing erect
in humanoid form, though they lack wings or atai!. The
first dragonborn had scales of vibrant hues matching
the colors of their dragon kin, but generations of
interbreeding have created a more uniform appearance.
Their small, fine scales are usually brass or bronze
in colar, sometimes ranging to scarlet, rust, gold, ar
copper-green. They are tall and strongly built, often
standing close to 6'h feet tall and weighing 300 pounds
ar more. Their hands and feet are strong, talonlike
claws with three fingers and a thumb on each hand.
The blood of a particular type of dragon runs
very strong through some dragonborn clans. These
dragonborn often boast scales that more closely match
those of their dragon ancestor-bright
red, green, blue,
or white, lustrous black, ar gleaming metallic gold,
silver, brass, copper, or bronze.

UNCOMMON

SELF-SUFFICIENT

CLANS

To any dragonborn.
the dan is more important than
life itself. Dragonborn
owe their devotion and respect
to their dan above ali e1se, even the gods. Each
dragonborn's
conduct reflects on the honor of his or her
dan, and bringing dishonor to the dan can result in
expulsion and exile. Each dragonborn
knows his or her
station and duties within the dan, and honor demands
maintaining
the bounds of that position.
A continuaI drive for self-improvement
reflects the
self-sufficiency of the race as a whole. Dragonborn
value
skill and excellence in ali endeavors. They hate to fai!.
and they push themselves to extreme efforts before they
give up on something. A dragonborn
holds mastery of
a particular skill as a lifetime goal. Members of other
races who share the same commitment
find it easy to
earn the respect of a dragonborn.
Though ali dragonborn
strive to be self-sufficient,
they recognize that help is sometimes needed in difficult
situations. But the best source for such heJp is the
dan, and when a dan needs help. it turns to another
dragonborn
dan before seeking aid from other racesor even fram the gods.

DRAGONBORN

NAMES

Dragonborn
have personal names given at birth,
but they put their dan names first as a mark Df
honor. A chi!dhood na me or nickname is often used
among dutchmates
as a descriptive term or a term
of endearment.
The name might recall an event or
center on a habit.

RACES

lhe dragonborn and the rest ofthe raees in this ehapter are
uneommon. lhey don't exist in every worid of D&D, and
even where they are found. they are less widespread than
dwarves. elves. halAings. and humans.
In the cosmopolitan eities ofthe D&D multiverse, most
peopie hardly look twiee at members of even the most
exotie raees. But the small towns and villages that dot
the countryside are different. lhe common folk aren't
accustomed to seeing members ofthese races, and they
reaet accordingly.
Dragonborn. Irs easy to assume that a dragonborn is a
monster, especially ifhis or her scaies betray a ehromatic
heritage. Unless the dragonborn starts breathing fire and
causing destruction. though, peopie are likely to respond
with eaution rather than outright fear.
Gnome. Gnomes don't look like a threat and ean quickly
disarm suspieion with good humor. lhe eommon folk are
often eurious about gnomes, likely never having seen one
before. but they are rarely hostile or fearful.
HalfEIf. Although many people have never seen a haif-elf.
virtually everyone knows they exist. A half.elf stranger's
arrival is followed by gossip behind the half.elf's baek and
stoien glanees aeross the eommon room, rather than any
confrontation ar open curiosity.

HalfOrc. Irs usually safe to assume that a half.ore is
belligerent and quiek to anger, so peopie wateh themselves
around an unfamiliar half-ore. Shopkeepers might
surreptitiously hide valuable or fragile goods when a haif-ore
comes in. and peopie slowly clear out of a tavern, assuming a
fight will break out soon.
riefling. Haif.ores are greeted with a praetieal caution, but
tieAings are the subjeet of supernatural fear. lhe evil of their
heritage is plainly visibie in their features. and as far as most
people are eoneerned, a tieAing eould very well be a devil
straight from the Nine Hells. People might make warding
signs as a tieAing approaehes, eross the street to avoid
passing near, or bar shop doors before a tieAing ean enter.

Male Names: Arjhan. Balasar. Bharash, Donaar, Ghesh.
Heskan, Kriv. Medrash. Mehen. Nadarr. Pandjed,
Patrin, Rhogar, Shamash. Shedinn. Tarhun. Torinn
Female Names: Akra. Biri. Daar. Farideh, Harann.
HaviJar, Jheri, Kava, Korinn. Mishann, NaJa, Perra,
Raiann. Sora. Surina. Thava, Uadjit

33

Childhood Names: Climber. Earbender. Leaper. Pious.
Shieldbiter. Zealous
Clan Names: Clethtinthiallor. Daardendrian. Delmirev.
Drachedandion. Fenkenkabradon. Kepeshkmolik.
Kerrhylon. Kimbatuul. Linxakasendalor. Myastan.
Nemmonis. Norixius. Ophinshtalajiir. Prexijandilin.
Shestendeliath. Turnuroth. Verthisathurgiesh. Yarjerit

DRAGONBORN

TRAITS

Your draconic heritage manifests in a variety of traits
you share with other dragonborn.
Ability Score Increase. Your Strength score
increases by 2. and your Charisma score increases by 1.
Age. Young dragonborn grow quickly. They walk
hours after hatching. altain the size and development
of a IO-year-old human child by the age of 3. and reach
adulthood by 15. They Iive to be around 80.
AJignment. Dragonborn tend to extremes. making a
conscious choice for one side or the other in the cosmic
war between good and evil (represented by Bahamut
and Tiamat. respectively). Most dragonborn are good.
but those who side with Tiamat can be terrible villains.
Size. Dragonborn are taller and heavier than humans.
standing well over 6 feet tall and averaging almost 250
pounds. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
DRACONIC

ANCESTRY

Dragon

Damage Type

Brealh Weapon

Black
Blue

Acid
Lightning

Brass

Fire
Lightning

5 by 30 fI. line (Dex. save)
5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)

Bronze

Copper
Gold

Acid

Green

Poison

Red

Fire
Cold

Silver
White

Fire

Cold

5 by 30 ft. line (Dex. save)
5 by 30 fI. line (Dex. save)
15 ft. cone (Dex. save)
15 ft. cone (Con. save)
15 fI. cone (Dex. save)
15 fI. cone (Con. save)
15 fI. cone (Con. save)

•••

••

DRACONIANS

In the Dragonlance selling, lhe followers of the evil goddess
Takhisis learned a dark ritual that let them corrupt the
eggs of metallic dragons. producing evil dragonborn called
draconians. Five types of draconians. corresponding to the
five types of metallic dragons, fought for Takhisis in the War
ofthe Lance: auraks (gold). baaz (brass), bozak (bronze).
kapak (copper). and sivak (silver). In place of their draconic
breath weapons, they have unique magical abilities.

•••

••

DraconicAncestry. Vou have draconic ancestry.
Choose one type of dragon from the Draconic Ancestry
table. Your breath weapon and damage resistance are
determined by lhe dragon type. as shown in the table.
Breath Weapon. Vou can use your action to exhale
destructive energy. Your draconic ancestry determines
the size, shape. and damage type of the exhalation.
When you use your breath weapon, each creature in
the area of the exhalation must make a saving throw.
the type of which is determined by your draconic
ancestry. The DC for this saving throw equals 8 +
your Constitution modifier + your proficiency bonus. A
creature takes 2d6 damage on a failed save. and half
as much damage on a successful one. The damage
increases to 3d6 at 6th levei. 4d6 at 11th leveI, and 5d6
at 16th leveI.
After you use your breath weapon, you can't use it
again until you complete a short or long resl.
Damage Resistance. Vou have resistance to the
damage type associated with your draconic ancestry.
Languages. Vou can speak. read, and write Common
and Draconic. Draconic is thought to be one of the
oldest languages and is often used in the study of magic.
The language sounds harsh to most other creatures and
includes numerous hard consonants and sibilants.

GNOME
SKINNY AND FLAXEN-HAIRED,

HIS SKIN

walnut brown and his eyes a startling
turquoise. Burgell stood half as tall as Aeron an

ad to

climb up on a stool to look out the peephole. Like most habitations in Oeble. that particular tenement had been built
for humans, and smaller residents coped with the resulting
awkwardness as best they could.
But at least the relative largeness ofthe apartment gave
Burgell room to pack in ali his gnome-sized gear. Thefront
room was his workshop. and it contained a bewildering
miscellany of tools: hammers. chisels. saws. lockpicks,
tinted lenses.jeweler's loupes. andjars of powdered and
shredded ingredients for casting spells. Afat gray cat. the
mage'sfamiliar, lay curled atop a grimoire. Tt opened its
eyes. gave Aeron a disdainjulyellow stare. then appeared
to go back to sleep.
-Richard

Lee Byers, The Black Bouquet

A constant hum of busy activity pervades the warrens
and neighborhoods where gnomes form their closeknit communities. Louder sounds punctuate the hum:
a crunch of grinding gears here, a minor explosion
there, a yelp of surprise or triumph, and especially
bursts of laughter. Gnomes take de!ight in !ife, enjoying
every moment of invention, exploration, investigation,
creation, and play.

VIBRANT

EXPRESSION

A gnome's energy and enthusiasm for living shines
through every inch of his or her tiny body. Gnomes
average slightly over 3 feet tall and weigh 40 to 45
pounds. Their tan or brown faces are usually adorned
with broad smiles (beneath their prodigious noses),
and their bright eyes shine with excitement. Their

fair hair has a tendency to stick out in every direction,
as if expressing the gnome's insatiable interest in
everything around.
A gnome's persona!ity is writ large in his or ber
appearance. A male gnome's beard, in contrast to
his wild hair, is kept carefully trimmed but often
styled into curious forks or neat points. A gnome's
clothing, though usually made in modest earth tones,
is elaborately decorated with embroidery, embossing,
or gleaming jewels.

DELIGHTED

DEDICATION

As far as gnomes are concerned, being a!ive is a
wonderful thing, and they squeeze every ounce of
enjoyment out of their three to tive centuries of !ife.
Humans might wonder about getting bored over the
course of such a long tife, and elves take plenty of time
to savor the beauties of the world in their long years, but
gnomes seem to worry that even with ali that time, they
can't get in enough of the things they want to do and see.
Gnomes speak as if they can't get the thoughts
out of their heads fast enough. Even as they offer
ideas and opinions on a range of subjects, they still
manage to listen carefully to others, adding the
appropriate exclamations of surprise and appreciation
along the way.
PART

I

RACES

35

DEEP GNOMES

A third subrace of gnomes, the deep gnomes (or svirfneblin),
live in small communities
scattered in the Underdark. Unlike
the duergar and the drow, svirfneblin are as good as their
surface cousins. However, their humor and enthusiasm
are dampened
by their oppressive
environment,
and their
inventive expertise is directed mostly toward stonework.

~
Though gnomes love jokes of ali kinds, particularly
puns and pranks, they're just as dedicaled lo lhe more
serious tasks they undertake, Many gnomes are skilled
engineers, alchemists, tinkers, and inventors, They're
willing to make mistakes and laugh at themselves in
lhe process of perfecting what they do, taking bold
(sometimes foolhardy) risks and dreaming large,

BRIGHT BURROWS
Gnomes make their homes in hilly, wooded lands. They
live underground but get more fresh air than dwarves
do, enjoying the natural, living world on the surface
whenever lhey can, Their homes are well hidden by
bolh elever conslruclion and simple illusions, Welcome
visitors are quickly ushered inlo lhe bright, warm
burrows, Those who are not welcome are unlikely to
find the burrows in lhe first place,
Gnomes who setlle in human lands are commonly
gemcutlers, engineers, sages, or tinkers. Some human
families relain gnome lutors, ensuring lhat their pupils
enjoy a mix of serious learning and delighted enjoyment.
A gnome mighl tutor severa I generalions of a single
human family over the course of his or her long life.

~

Male Names: Alston, Alvyn, Boddynock, Brocc, Burgell,
Dimble, Eldon, Erky, Fonkin, Frug, Gerbo, Gimble,
Glim,Jebeddo, Kellen, Namfoodle, Orryn, Roondar,
Seebo, Sindri, Warryn, Wrenn, Zook
Female Names: Bimpnollin, Breena, Caramip, Carlin,
Donella, Duvamil, ElIa, ElIyjobell, ElIywick, Lilli,
Loopmottin, Lorilla, Mardnab, Nissa, Nyx, Oda, Orla,
Roywyn, Shamil, Tana, Waywocket, Zanna
Clan Names: Beren, Daergel, Folkor, Garrick, Nackle,
Murnig, Ningel, Raulnor, Scheppen, Timbers, Turen
Nicknames: Aleslosh, Ashhearlh, Badger, Cloak,
Doublelock, Filchbatler, Fnipper, Ku, Nim, Oneshoe,
Pock, Sparklegem, Stumbleduck

SEEING THE WORLD
Curious and impulsive, gnomes might take up
adventuring as a way to see the world ar for lhe lave
of exploring. As lovers of gems and other fine ilems,
some gnomes take to adventuring as a quick, if
dangerous, path to wealth. Regardless of what spurs
them lo adventure, gnomes who adopt this way of life
eke as much enjoymenl out of it as they do oul of any
other activity they undertake, sometimes to lhe great
annoyance of lheir adventuring companions.

GNOME NAMES
Gnomes love names, and most have half a dozen or so.
A gnome's mother, falher, elan elder, aunts, and uneles
each give the gnome a name, and various nicknames
from juSl about everyone else might or might not stick
over time. Gnome names are typically variants on the
names of ancestors or distant relalives, lhough some
are purely new inventions. When dealing with humans
and others who are "stuffy" aboul names, a gnome
learns to use no more than three names: a personal
name, a elan na me, and a nickname, choosing lhe one in
each calegory that's the most fun to say.

PART

I

I RACES

GNOME TRAITS
Your gnome character has certain characteristics in
common with ali other gnomes.
Ability Scare lncrease. Your Intelligence score
increases by 2.
Age. Gnomes mature at lhe same rate humans do, and
most are expected to settle down into an adult life by
around age 40. They can live 350 to almosl 500 years.
Alignment. Gnomes are most oflen good. Those who
lend toward law are sages, engineers, researchers,
scholars, invesligators, ar inventors. Those who lend
toward chaos are minslrels, lrickslers, wanderers,
ar fandful jewelers. Gnomes are good-hearted, and

, UI

4
ALWAYS

•
ApPRECIATIVE

It's rare for a gnome to be hostile ar malicious unless he
ar she has suffered a grievous injury. Gnomes know that
most races don't share their sense of humor, but they enjoy
anyone's company just as they enjoy everything else they set
out to do.

~

~

even the tricksters among them are more playful
than vicious.
Size. Gnomes are between 3 and 4 feet tall and
average about 40 pounds. Your size is Small.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 25 feel.
Darkvision. Accustomed to life underground, you have
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. Vou can
see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright
light, and in darkness as if it were dim lighl. Vou can't
discern colar in darkness, only shades of gray.
Gnome Cunning. Vou have advantage on ali
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws
against magic.
Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common
and Gnomish. The Gnomish language, which uses the
Owarvish script, is renowned for its technical treatises
and its catalogs of knowledge about the natural world.
Subrace. Two subraces of gnomes are found among
the worlds of 0&0: forest gnomes and rock gnomes.
Choose one of these subraces.
FOREST GNOME

As a forest gnome, you have a natural knack for iIlusion
and inherent quickness and stealth. In the worlds of
0&0, forest gnomes are rare and secretive. They gather
in hidden communities in sylvan forests, using iIlusions
and trickery to conceal themselves from threats ar
to mask their escape should they be detected. Forest
gnomes tend to be friendly with other good-spirited
woodland folk, and they regard elves and good feyas
their most important allies. These gnomes also befriend
small forest animais and rely on them for information
about threats that might prowl their lands.
Ability Score Increase. Your Oexterity score
increases by 1.
Natural I1lusionist. Vou know the minor illusion
cantrip. lntelligence is your spellcasting ability for il.
Speak with Small Beasts. Through sounds and
gestures, you can communicate simple ideas with Small
ar smaller beasts. Forest gnomes love animaIs and often
keep squirrels, badgers, rabbits, moles, woodpeckers,
and other creatures as beloved pets.
ROCK GNOME

As a rock gnome, you have a natural inventiveness and
hardiness beyond that of other gnomes. Most gnomes
in the worlds of 0&0 are rock gnomes, including the
tinker gnomes of the Oragonlance setting.

AbiJity Score Increase. Your Constitution score
increases by 1.
Artificer's Lore. Whenever you make an Intelligence
(History) check related to magic items, alchemical
objects, ar technological devices, you can add twice your
proficiency bonus, instead of any proficiency bonus you
normallyappIy.
Tinker. Vou have proficiency with artisan's toois
(tinker's tools). Using those tools, you can spend 1
hour and 10 gp worth of materiaIs to construct a Tiny
c1ockwork device (AC 5, 1 hp). The device ceases
to function after 24 hours (unless you spend 1 hour
repairing it to keep the device functioning), ar when
you use your action to dismantle it; at that time, you can
reclaim the materiaIs used to create il. Vou can have up
to three such devices active at a time.
When you create a device, choose one of the
following options:
Clockwork Toy. This toy is a c1ockwork animal, monster,
ar person, such as a frog, mouse, bird, dragon, ar
soldier. When placed on the grou nd, the toy moves
5 feet across the ground on each of your turns in a
random direction. lt makes noises as appropriate
to the creature it represents.
Fire Starter. The device produces a miniature
flame, which you can use to light a candle,
torch, ar campfire. Using the device
requires your action.
Music Sox. When opened, this music box
plays a single song at a moderate volume.
The box stops playing when it
reaches the song's end ar
when it is c1osed.

"Tanis?" said Flint hesitant/y as the man neared.
"The same." The newcomer's beardedface split in a wide
grin. He held open his arms and, before the dwarf could
stop him, engulfed Flint in a hug that lifted him off the
ground. The dwarf clasped his oldfriend closefor a brief
instant, then, rememberinghis digni(y, squirmed andfreed
himself from lhe half-elf's embrace.
-Margaret

Weis and Tracy Hickman,
Dragons of Autumn Twilight

HALF-ELF
FUNT

SQUINTED

INTO THE SETTING

SUN. HE THOUGHT

he saw theftgure of a man striding up the path. 5tanding,

Walking in two worlds but truly belonging to neither,
half-elves combine what some say are the best qualities
of their elf and human parents: human curiosity,
inventiveness, and ambition tempered by the refined
senses, love of nature, and artistic tastes of the elves.
Some half-elves Iive among humans, set apart by their
emotional and physical differences, watching friends
and loved ones age while time barely touches them.
Others Iive with the elves, growing restless as they
reach adulthood in the timeless elven realms, while
their peers continue to Iive as children. Many half-elves,
unable to fit into either society, choose Iives of solitary
wandering or join with other misfits and outcasts in
the adventuring life.

Flint drew back into the shadow of a tall pine to see better.
The man's walk was marked by an easy grace-an eluish
grace, Flint would haue said;yet the man's body had lhe
thickness and tight muscles of a human, while thefacial
hair was deftnite/y humankind's. Ali the dwarf could see
of the man'sface beneath a green hood was tan skin and a
brownish-red beard. A longbow was slung ouer one shoulder
and a sword hung at his left side. He was dressed in soft
leather, careful/y tooled in the intricate designs the elues
loued. But no elfin the world of Krynn could grow a beard
... no elf, but ...

PA RT 1 I RACES

OF Two WORLDS
To humans, half-elves look Iike elves, and to elves, they
look humano In height, they're on par with both parents,
though they're neither as slender as elves nor as broad
as humans. They range fram under 5 feet to about 6 feet
ta lI, and from 100 to 180 pounds, with men only slightly
talIer and heavier than women. Half-elf men do have
facial hair, and sometimes grow beards to mask their
elven ancestry. Half-elven coloration and features lie
somewhere between their human and elf parents, and
thus sh'ow a variety even more pronounced than that
found among either race. They tend to have the eyes
of their elven parents.

EXCELLENT

AM BASSADORS

Many half.elves leam at an early age to get along with
everyone, defusing hostility and finding common ground.
As a race, they have elven grace wilhoul elven aloofness and
human energy wilhout human boorishness. They oflen make
excellenl ambassadors and go.belweens (excepl between
elves and humans, since each side suspecls lhe half.elf
offavoring lhe olher).

DIPLOMATS

OR WANDERERS

Half-elves have no lands of their own, though they are
welcome in human cities and somewhat less welcome
in elven forests. In large cities in regions where elves
and humans interact often, half-elves are sometimes
numerous enough to form small communities of their
own. They enjoy the company of other half-elves, the
onIy people who truIy understand what it is to live
between these two worlds.
In most parts of the world. though, haIf-eIves are
uncommon enough that one might live for years
without meeting another. Some half-elves prefer to
avoid company altogether, wandering the wilds as
trappers, foresters, hunters, or adventurers and visiting
civilization onIy rarely. Like elves, they are driven by
the wanderIust that comes of their longevity. Others,
in contrast, throw themselves into the thick of society,
putting their charisma and social skilIs to great use
in diplomatic roles or as swindlers.

crealive expression, demonstrating neither love
of Jeaders nor desire for followers. They chafe at
rules, resenl others' demands, and sometimes prove
unreliable, or at least unpredictable.
Size. HaIf-eIves are about the same size as humans,
ranging from 5 to 6 feet taIl. Vour size is Medium.
Speed. Vour base walking speed is 30 feel.
Darkvision. Thanks to your elfblood, you have
superior vision in dark and dim conditions. Vou can
see in dim light within 60 feet of you as if it were bright
light, and in darkness as if it were dim lighl. Vou can't
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.
Fey Ancestry. Vou have advantage on saving throws
against being charmed, and magic can't put you to sleep.
Skill VersatiJity. Vou gain proficiency in two skilIs
of your choice.
Languages. Vou can speak, read, and write Common,
EIvish, and one extra language of your choice,

HALF- ELF NAMES
Half-elves use either human or elven naming
conventions. As if to emphasize that they don't really fit
in to either society, half-elves raised among humans are
often given elven names, and those raised among elves
often take human names.

HALF- ELF TRAITS
Vour half-elf character has some qualities in common
with elves and some that are unique to half-elves.
AbiJity Score Increase. Vour Charisma score
increases by 2, and two other ability scores of your
choice increase by I.
Age. Half-elves mature at the same rate humans
do and reach adulthood around the age of 20. They
live much longer than humans, however, often
exceeding 180 years.
AJignment. Half-elves share the chaotic bent of their
elven heritage. They value both personal freedom and
PART 1

RACES

39

Whether united under the leadership of a mighty
warloek OI' having fought to a standstill after years
of eonfliet, ore and human tribes sometimes form
allianees, joining forces into a larger horde lo lhe terror
of eivilized lands nearby. When lhese allianees are
sealed by marriages, half-ores are bom. Some half-ores
rise lo beeome proud ehiefs of ore lribes, lheir human
blood giving them an edge over lheir full-blooded ore
rivaIs. Some venture inlo lhe world lo prove lheir worlh
among humans and other more civilized raees. Many of
lhese beeome advenlurers, aehieving grealness for lheir
mighly deeds and nOloriely for their barbarie eustoms
and savage fury.

SCARRED AND STRONG
THE WARCHIEF MHURREN

ROUSED HIMSELF FROM HIS

sleeping-furs and his women and pulled a short hauberk
of heauy steel rings ouer his thick. well-muscled torso. He
usual{y rose before most of his warriors. since he had a
strong streak of human blood in him. and hefound the
daylight less bothersome than most of his tribe did. Among
the Bloody Skulls. a warrior was judged by his strength. his
jlerceness. and his wits. Human ancestry was no blemish
against a warrior-prauided he was euery bit as strang.
enduring. and bloodthirsty as hisfull-blooded kin. Halforcs who were weaker than their orc comrades didn't last
long among the Bloody Skulls OI' any other orc tribefor
that matter. Rut it was often true that a bit of human blood
gave a warrior just the right mix of cunning. ambition, and
self-discipline to go far indeed. as Mhurren had. He was
master of a tribe that could muster two thousand spears.
and the strangest chiefin TlJar.
-Richard

4-0

PART

I

I RACES

Baker. Swordmage

Half-ores' grayish pigmenlation, sloping foreheads,
juttingjaws, prominenl leelh, and lowering builds make
their orcish herilage plain for ali lo see. Half-ores sland
belween 6 and 7 feel lall and usually weigh belween
180 and 250 pounds.
Ores regard battle sears as lokens of pride and
ornamenlal sears as lhings of beauly. OlheI' sears,
though, mark an ore 01' half-ore as a formeI' slave 01'
a disgraeed exile. Any half-ore who has lived among
01' near ores has sears, whelher lhey are marks of
humilialion 01' of pride, reeounling their pasl exploils
and injuries. Sueh a half-ore living among humans might
display lhese sears proudly 01' hide them in shame.

THE MARK OF GRUUMSH
The one-eyed god Gruumsh erealed lhe ores, and even
those ores who turn away from his worship ean'l fully
escape his influenee. The same is lrue of haIf-ores.
lhough lheir human blood moderales lhe impaet of lheir
orcish heritage. Some half-ores hear the whispers of
Gruumsh in lheir dreams, ealling lhem lo unleash lhe
rage tha! simmers wilhin lhem. Others feel Gruumsh's

GRUDGING

exultation when they join in melee eombat-and either
exult along with him or shiver with fear and loathing.
Half-ores are not evil by nature, but evil does lurk within
them, whether they embraee it or rebel against it.
Beyond the rage of Gruumsh, half-ores feel emotion
powerfully. Rage doesn't jusl quieken their pulse, it
makes their bodies burn. An insult stings tike acid,
and sadness saps their strength. But they laugh loudly
and heartily, and simple bodily pleasures-feasting,
drinking, wrestling, drumming, and wild dancing-fill
their hearls with joy. They tend to be short-tempered
and sometimes sullen, more inclined to aelion than
eontemplation and to fighting than arguing. The mosl
aeeomplished half-ores are lhose with enough self.
eontrol to get by in a civilized land.

TRIBES AND SLUMS
Half-ores most often live among ores. Of the other raees,
humans are most tikely to aeeept half.ores, and half.
ores almost always live in human lands when not living
among ore lribes. Whether proving themselves among
rough barbarian tribes or serabbling to survive in the
slums of larger cities, half-ores gel by on their physieal
might, their enduranee, and lhe sheer determinalion
lhey inheril from lheir human aneeslry.

HALF-ORC

NAMES

Half-ores usually have names appropriate lo the eullure
in whieh they were raised. A half-ore who wanls lo fit in
among humans mighl trade an ore name for a human
name. Some half-ores wilh human names decide to
adopt a guttural ore na me beeause they lhink it makes
lhem more intimidating.
Male Ore Names: Deneh, Feng, Gell, Henk, Holg, Imsh,
Kelh, Krusk, Mhurren, Ront. Shump. Thokk
Female Ore Names: Baggi, Emen, Engong. Kansif.
Myev. Neega. Ovak, Ownka, Shaulha, Sulha. Vola,
Volen, Yevelda

HALF-ORC

TRAITS

Your half-ore eharaeter has eertain traits deriving from
your ore aneestry.

ACCEPTANCE

Eaeh half.ore finds a way to gain aeeeptanee
from those who
hate ores. Some are reserved, trying not to draw atlention to
themselves.
A few demonstrate
piety and good.heartedness
as publicly as they ean (whether ar not sueh demonstrations
are genuine). And some simply try to be so tough that others
just avoid them.

••
Abi/ity Score lncrease. Your Strength seore
inereases by 2, and your Constitution score
inereases by I.
Age. Half-ores mature a tittle faster than humans,
reaehing adulthood around age 14. They age
notieeably faster and rarely tive longer than 75 years.
Alignment. Half-ores inherit a tendeney toward ehaos
from their ore parents and are not strongly inclincd
toward good. Half-ores raised among ores and willillg
to tive out their tives among them are usually evil.
Size. Half-ores are somewhat largcr and bulkier than
humans, and they range from 5 to well over ti feet tall.
Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. Thanks to your ore blood. you have
superior vision in dark and dim eOllditions. Vou ean
see in dim tight within 60 feet of you as if it were bright
tight. and in darkness as if it were dim light. You ean't
diseern eolor in darkness, only shades of gray.
Menacing. You gain proficieney in the
Intimidation skill.
Relentless Endurance. When you are reduced to
O hit points but not killed outright. you can drop to I hit
point instead. Vou can't use this feature again unti! you
finish a long resto
Savage Attacks. When you score a criticaI hit with
a melee weapon attack, you can roll one of thc wcapon's
damage dice one additional time and add it lo lhe extra
damage of lhe criticaI hit.
Languages. You can speak. read, and
write Common and Ore. Ore is a
harsh. grating language with
hard consonants. It has
no script of its own
but is written in the
Dwarvish script.

that wicked glint in his eyes. "Youfight It, don'tyou? Like
a little wildcat, I wager. Every littlejab and commentjust
sharpensyour

c1aws."
-Erin

M. Evans, Brimstone Angels

To be greeted with stares and whispers, to suffer
violence and insult on the street, to see mistrust and
fear in every eye: this is the lot of the tiefling. And to
twist the knife, tieflings know that this is because a
pact struck generations ago infused the essence of
Asmodeus-overlord of the Nine Hells-into their
bloodline. Their appearance and their nature are not
their fault but the result of an ancient sin, for which
they and their children and their children's children
will always be held accountable.

INFERNAL BLOODLINE

TIEFLING
"BUT

VOU DO SEE THE WAY PEOPLE LOOK AT VOU,

devil's child."

Those block eyes, cold as a winter storm, were staring
right into her heart and the sudden seriousness in his
voice jolted her.
"What is it they say?" he asked. "One's a curiosity, two's
a conspiracy-"
"Three's a curse," shefinished. "You think I haven't heard
that rubbish before?"
"I knowyou have." When sheglared at him, he added,
"[t's not as if l'm plumbing the depths ofyour mind, dear
girl. That is the burden of every tiefling. Some break under
it, some make it the millstone around their neck, some
revel in it." He tilted his head again, scrutinizingher,

42

PART 1 I RACES

with

Tieflings are derived fram human bloodlines, and in the
broadest possible sense, they stilllook humano However,
their infernal heritage has left a elear imprint on their
appearance. Tieflings have large horns that take any
of a variety of shapes: some have curling horns like a
ram, others have straight and tall horns like a gazelle's,
and some spiral upward like an antelopes' horns. They
have thick tails, four to tive feet long, which lash or coil
around their legs when they get upset or nervous. Their
canine teeth are sharply pointed, and their eyes are
solid colors-black, red, white, silver, or gold-with no
visible selera or pupil. Their skin tones cover the full
range of human coloration, but also inelude various
shades of red. Their hair, cascading down from behind
their horns, is usually dark, from black or brown to dark
red, blue, or purple.

SELF- RELIANT

AND SUSPICIOUS

Tieflings subsist in small minorities found mostly in
human cities or towns, often in the roughest quarters
of those places, where they grow up to be swindlers,

MUTUAL

thieves, or crime lords, Sometimes they live among
other minority populations in enclaves where they are
treated with more respect.
Lacking a homeland, tieftings know that they have
to make their own way in the world and that they have
to be strong to survive, They are not quick to trust
anyone who claims to be a friend. but when a tiefling's
companions demonstrate that they trust him or her,
the tiefting learns to extend the same trust to them,
And once a tiefting gives someone loyalty, the tiefting
is a firm friend or ally for life,
TIEFLING

NAMES

Tiefting names fali into three broad categories. Tieftings
born into another culture typically have names reftective
of that culture. Some have names derived from the
Infernallanguage, passed down through generations,
that reftect their fiendish heritage. And some younger
tieftings. striving to find a place in the world, adopt a
na me that signifies a virtue or other concept and then
try to embody that concept. For some. the chosen na me
is a noble quest. For others. it's a grim destiny.
Male Infernal Names: Akmenos, Amnon, Barakas,
Damakos, Ekemon, lados, Kairon. Leucis, Melech.
Mordai, Morthos. Pelaios, Skamos. Therai
Female Infernal Names: Akta, Anakis, Bryseis, Criella.
Damaia. Ea. Kallista. Lerissa. Makaria. Nemeia,
Orianna. Phelaia. Rieta
"Virtue" Names: Art. Carrion, Chant, Creed, Despair,
Excellence, Fear, Glory, Hope, Ideal. Music. Nowhere.
Open, Poetry, Quest. Random. Reverence, Sorrow.
Temerily, Torment, Weary

MISTRUST

Peopletend to be suspicious of tieflings. assuming that
their infernalheritage has left its mark on their personality
and morality.not just their appearance. Shopkeepers keep
a close eye on their goods when lieflingsenler lheir stores.
the lown walch mighl followa lieflingaround for a while.
and demagogues blame lieflings for slrange happenings.
The realily.lhough. is lhal a liefling's bloodlinedoesn'l affecl
his or her personalilylo any greal degree. Yearsof dealing
wilh mislrusl does leaveils mark on mosllieflings. and lhey
respond lo il in differenlways.Some choose lo Iiveup lo lhe
wickedslereolype. bul olhers are virluous. Mosl are simply
veryaware ofhow people respond lo lhem. Aflerdealing wilh
lhis mislrusllhroughoul youlh. a lieflingoflen develops lhe
abililylo overcome prejudicelhrough charm or inlimidalion.

~
TIEFLING

~
TRAITS

Tieflings share cerlain racial traits as a result of their
infernal descent.
AbiJity Seore Inerease. Your lntelligence score
increases by 1, and your Charisma score increases by 2.
Age. Tieflings mature at the same rate as humans but
live a few years longer.
Alignment. Tieftings might not have an innate
tendency toward evil. but many of them end up there.
Evil or noto an independent nature inclines many
tieflings toward a chaotic alignment.
Size. Tieftings are about the same size and build as
humans. Your size is Medium.
Speed. Your base walking speed is 30 feet.
Darkvision. Thanks lOyour infernal heritage, you
have superior vision in dark and dim conditions. You
can see in dim Iight within 60 feet of you as if it were
bright 1ight. and in darkness as if it were dim light. You
can't discern color in darkness. only shades of gray.
Hellish Resistance. You have resistance
to fire damage.
Infernal Legaey. You know the thaumatuqJy cantrip.
Once you reach 3rd levei, you can cast the hellish
rebuke spell once per day as a 2nd-levei spell. Once you
reach 5th levei, you can also cast the darkness spell
once per day. Charisma is your spellcasting ability for
these spclls.
Languages. You can speak. read. and write Common
and Infernal.

CHAPTER
OVENTURERS

3: CLASSES
ARE EXTRAOROINARY

PEOPLE,

driven bya thirst for excitement into a
tife that others would never dare lead,
They are herocs, compelled to explore the
dark places of lhe world and take on lhe
challenges lhat lesser women and men
can't stand against.
Class is the primary dcfinition of what your character
can do, !t's more than a profession; it's your character's
calling. Class shapes the way you think about the
world and intcract with it and your relationship with
other people and powers in the multiverse. A fighler,
for example, might view the world in pragmatic terms
of strategy and maneuvering, and see herself as just a
pawn in a much larger game. A cleric, by contrast, might
see himself as a willing servanl in a god's unfolding plan
or a conflict brewing among various deities. While the
fighter has contacts in a mercenary company or army,
the cleric might know a number of priests, paladins, and
devotees who share his faith.

Your class gives you a variety of special features, such
as a fighter's mastery of weapons and armor, and a
wizard's spells. At low leveis, your class gives you only
two or three features, but as you advance in levei you
gain more and your existing features often improve.
Each class enlry in this chapter includes a table
summarizing the benefits you gaio at every levei, and
a detailed explanalion of each one.
Adventurers sometimes advance in more thao one
class. A rogue might switch direction in tife and swear
the oath of a paladin, A barbarian might discover latent
magical abilily and dabble in the sorcerer class while
continuing to advance as a barbarian. Elves are known
to combine martial mastery with magical training
and advance as fighters and wizards simultaneously.
Oplional rules for combining classes in this way, called
multiclassing, appear in chapter 6.
Twelve classes-tisted
in the Classes table-are found
in almost every D&D world and define lhe spectrum of
lypical adventurers.

1°'éFL:;;:A:S:SE:S==============================:::;=~"

elass

Descriplion

Barbarian

A fierce warrior of primilive background
who can enter a battle rage
An inspiring magician whose power

Bard

Hil
Die

Primary
Abilily

d12

51renglh

A priestly champion who wields divine

d8

Charisma

A priest of the Old Faith, wielding lhe
powers of nalure-moonlight
and

5trenglh &

Light and medium armor, shields,
simple and marlial weapons

Dexlerily &

Lighl armor, simple weapons, hand

Charisma

crossbows, longswords, rapiers,
shortswords
Lighl and medium armor, shields,

d8

Wisdom

Wisdom &

d8

Wisdom

Charisma
Inlelligence

magic in service of a higher power
Druid

Armor and Weapon
Proficiencies

Conslitulion

echoes the music of crealion
Cleric

Saving Throw
Proficiencies

& Wisdom

planl growlh, fire and lighlning-and
Fighter
Monk

Paladin

adopling animal forms
A masler of marlial combal, skilled wilh
a variely of weapons and armor
An masler of marlial arls, harnessing
lhe power of lhe body in pursuil of
physical and spirilual perfeclion
A holy warrior bound lo a sacred oalh

Ranger

A warrior who uses marlial prowess and

Rogue

nalure magic lo combal Ihreals on lhe
edges of civilizalion
A scoundrel who uses sleallh and

Sorcerer

Warlock

Irickery to overcome obslacles and
enemies
A spellcasler who draws on inherenl
magic from a gifl or bloodline
A wielder of magic Ihal is derived from
a bargain wilh an eXlraplanar enlily
A scholarly magic-user capable of
manipulaling lhe slruclures of realily

simple weapons
Lighl and medium armor (nonmelal),
shields (nonmet.;I), clubs, daggers,
darls, javelins, maces, quarlerslaffs,
scimilars, sickles, slings, spears

dlO

51renglh or

d8

dlO

51renglh &

Wisdom&
Charisma

dlO

Charisma
Dexlerity &

d8

d6
d8
d6

5trenglh &

Ali armor, shields, simple and marlial

Dexterity

Conslilulion

Dexterity &
Wisdom

5trenglh &

weapons
5imple weapons, shorlswords

Dexlerily
Ali armor, shields, simple and marlial
weapons
Lighl and medium armor, shields,

Wisdom

51renglh &
Dexlerity

Dexlerily

Dexlerily &

Light armor, sim pie weapons, hand

Intelligence

crossbows, longswords, rapiers,
shorlswords

Charisma

Conslilulion

Daggers, darls, slings, quarlerstaffs,
lighl crossbows

Charisma

& Charisma
Wisdom&

Intelligence

Charisma
Intelligence
&Wisdom

simple and marlial weapons

Lighl armor, simple weapons
Daggers, darts, slings, quarterstaffs,

light crossbows

~5

BARBARIAN
A tall human tribesman strides through a blizzard,
draped in fur and hefting his axe. He laughs as he
charges toward the frost giant who dared poach his
people's elk herdo
A half-orc snarls at the latest challenger to her
authority over their savage tribe, ready to break his neck
with her bare hands as she did to the last six rivaIs.
Frothing at the mouth, a dwarf slams his helmet into
the face of his drow foe, then turns to drive his armored
elbow into the gut of another.
These barbarians, different as they might be, are
defined by their rage: unbridled, unquenchable, and
unthinking fury. More than a mere emotion, their anger
is the ferocity of a cornered predator, the unrelenting
assault of a storm, the churning turmoil of the sea.
For some, their rage springs from a communion
with fierce animal spirits. Others draw from a roiling
reservoir of anger at a world full of pain. For every
barbarian, rage is a power that fuels not just a battle
frenzy but also uncanny reflexes, resilience, and
feats of strength.
PRIMAL INSTINCT
People of towns and cities take pride in how their
civilized ways set them apart from animaIs, as if
denying one's own nature was a mark of superiority. To
a barbarian, though, civilization is no virtue, but a sign
of weakness. The strong embrace their animal naturekeen instincts, primaI physicality, and ferocious rage.
Barbarians are uncomfortable when hedged in by walls
and crowds. They thrive in the wilds of their homelands:
the tundra, jungle, or grasslands where their tribes
live and hunt.
Barbarians come alive in the chaos of combat.
They can enter a berserk state where rage takes over,
giving them superhuman strength and resilience. A
barbarian can draw on this reservoir of fury only a few
times without resting, but those few rages are usually
sufficient to defeat whatever threats arise.

A LIFE OF DANGER
Not every member of the tribes deemed "barbarians"
by scions of civilized society has the barbarian c1ass. A
true barbarian among these people is as uncommon as
a skilled fighter in a town. and he or she plays a similar
role as a protector of the people and a leader in times
of war. Life in the wild places of the world is fraught
with peril: rival tribes, deadly weather, and terrifying
PART 1 I CLASSES

TH E BARBARIAN
Levei

Proficieney
Bonus

1st

+2

2nd

Rages

Rage
Damage

Rage, Unarmored
Defense

2

+2

+2

Reekless Attaek,

2

+2

3rd
4th

+2
+2

Danger Sense
Primai Path
Ability Score

3
3

+2
+2

5th

+3

Extra Attaek,

3

+2

+3

Fast Movement
Path feature

8th

+3
+3

Ferallnstinet
Ability Seore

4
4
4

+2
+2

9th

+4

Brutal Criticai

4

+3

10th

+4

(1 die)
Path feature

4

+3

11th

+4

Relentless

4

+3

12th

+4

Ability Score
Improvement

5

+3

13th

+5

Brutal Criticai

5

+3

14th

+5

(2 dice)
Path feature

5

15th

+5
+5

Persistent Rage
Ability Seore

5

+3
+3

5

+4

+6

Improvement
Brutal Criticai

6

+6

(3 dice)
Indomitable

6

Features

Improvement

6th
7th

+2

Improvement

16th
17th
18th

Rage

Might
19th
20th

+6

Ability Score

+6

Improvement
Primai Champion

6
Unlimited

What led you to take up the adventuring life? Were you
lured to settled lands by the promise of riches? Did you
join forces with soldiers of those lands to face a shared
threat? Did monsters or an invading horde drive you
out of your homeland, making you a rootless refugee?
Perhaps you were a prisoner of war, brought in chains to
"civilized" lands and only now able to win your freedom.
Or you might have been cast out from your people
because of a crime you committed, a taboo you violated,
or a coup that removed you from a position of authority.
QUICK BUILD

monsters. Barbarians charge headlong into that danger
so that their people don't have to.
Their courage in the face of danger makes barbarians
perfectly suited for adventuring. Wandering is often a
way of life for their native tribes, and the rootless life of
the adventurer is little hardship for a barbarian. Some
barbarians miss the close-knit family structures of the
tribe, but eventually find them replaced by the bonds
formed among the members of their adventuring parties.

CREATING

Vou can make a barbarian quickly by following these
suggestions. First, put your highest ability score in
Strength, followed by Constitution. Second, choose the
outlander background.

CLASS FEATURES
As a barbarian, you gain the following class features.
HIT POINTS

Hit Dice: ld12 per barbarian levei
Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 12 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: ld12 (or 7) + your
Constitution modifier per barbarian leveI after 1st

A BARBARIAN

When creating a barbarian character, think about where
your character comes from and his or her place in the
world. Talk with your DM about an appropriate origin
for your barbarian. Did you come from a distant land,
making you a stranger in the area of the campaign?
Or is the campaign set in a rough-and-tumble frontier
where barbarians are common?

PROFICIENCIES

Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution
Skills: Choose two from Animal Handling, Athletics,
Intimidation, Nature, Perception, and Survival
PART 1

CL""

I::

EQUIPMENT

You start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background:
(a) a greataxe or (b) any martial melee weapon
(a) two handaxes or (b) any simple weapon

An expiorer's pack and four javelins

RAGE
In battle, you fight with primai ferocity. On your turn,
you can enter a rage as a bonus action.
While raging, you gain the following benefits ifyou
aren't wearing heavy armor:
Vou have advantage on Strength checks and Strength
saving throws.
When you make a melee weapon attack using
Strcngth, you gain a bonus to the damage roll that
increases as you gain leveis as a barbarian, as shown
in the Rage Damage column of the Barbarian table.
You have resistance to bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing damage.
If you are able to cast spells, you ean't cast them or
concentrate on tbem while raging.
Your rage lasts for 1 minute. lt ends early if you are
knocked unconscious or if your turn ends and you
haven't attacked a hostile creature since your last turn
or taken damage since then. Vou can also end your rage
on your turn as a bonus action.
Once you have raged the number of times shown
for your barbarian leveI in the Rages column of the
Barbarian table, you must finish a long rest before you
can rage again.

PART 1 I CLASSES

UNARMORED

DEFENSE

While you are not wearing any armor, your Armor Class
equals 10 + your Dexterity modifier + your Constitution
modifier. Vou can use a shield and still gain this benefit.

RECKLESS ATTACK
Starting at 2nd levei, you can throw aside ali concern
for defense to attack with fierce desperation. When
you make your first attack on your turn, you can decide
to attack recklessly. Doing so gives you advantage on
melee weapon attack rolls using Strength during this
turn, but attack rolls against you have advantage until
your next turno

DANGER SENSE
At 2nd levei, you gain an uncanny sense of when things
nearby aren't as they should be, giving you an edge
when you dodge away from danger.
Vou have advantage on Dexterity saving throws
against effects that you can see, sue h as traps and spells.
To gain this benefit, you can't be blinded, deafened, or
incapacitated.

PRIMAL PATH
At 3rd levei. you choose a path that shapes the nature of
your rage. Choose the Path of the Berserker or the Path
of the Totem Warrior, both detailed at the end of the
c1ass description. Your choice grants you features at 3rd
levei and agaln at 6th, 10th, and 14th leveis.

ABILITY

SCORE IMPRovEMENT

When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th levei, you can increase one ability score of your
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.

EXTRA ATTACK
Beginning at 5th levei, you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno

FAST MOVEMENT
Starting at 5th levei, your speed increases by 10 feet
while you aren't wearing heavy armor.

FERAL INSTINCT
By 7th levei, your instincts are so honed that you have
advantage on initiative rolls.
Additionally, if you are surprised at the beginning of
combat and aren't incapacitated. you can act normally
on your first turn, but only ifyou enler your rage before
doing anything else on that turno

BRUTAL CRITICAL
Beginning at 9th levei, you can roll one additional
weapon damage die when determining the extra
damage for a criticai hit with a melee attack.
This increases to two additional dice at 13th levei
and three additional dice at 17th leveI.

RELENTLESS

RAGE

Starting at 11th levei, your rage can keep you fighting
despite grievous wounds. lf you drop to O hit points
while you're raging and don't die outright, you can make
a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. lfyou succeed. you
drop to 1 hit point inslead.
Each time you use this feature after the first. the DC
increases by 5. When you finish a short or long rest, the
DC resets to 10.

PERSISTENT

barbarians attribute their rage to different sources,
however. For some, it is an internai reservoir where
pain. grief. and anger are forged into a fury hard as
steel. Others see it as a spiritual blessing. a gift of
a totem animal.

PATH OF THE BERSERKER
For some barbarians. rage is a means to an end-that
end being violence. The Path of the Berserker is a path
of untrammeled fury, slick with blood. As you enter
the berserker's rage. you thrill in the chaos of battle,
heedless of your own health or well-being.
FRENZY

Starting when you choose this path at 3rd levei. you
can go inlo a frenzy when you rage. lf you do so. for
the duration of your rage you can make a single melee
weapon attack as a bonus action on each of your turns
after this one. When your rage ends. you suffer one levei
of exhaustion (as described in appendix A).
MINDLESS

RAGE

Beginning at 6th levei. you can't be charmed or
frightened while raging. lf you are charmed or
frightened when you enter your rage. the effect is
suspended for the duration of the rage.
INTIMIDATING

PRESENCE

Beginning at 10th levei, you can use your action to
frighten someone with your menacing presence.
When you do so. choose one creature that you can see
within 30 feet of YOU. lf the creature can see or hear
YOU. it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw (DC
equal to 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Charisma
modifier) or be frightened of you until the end of your
next turno On subsequent turns, you can use your action
to extend the duration of this effect on the frightened

RAGE

Beginning at 15th levei, your rage is so fierce that
il ends early only ifyou fali unconscious or ifyou
choose to end il.

INDOMITABLE

MIGHT

Beginning at 18th levei, if your total for a Strength
check is less than your Strength score, you can use that
score in place of the total.

PRIMAL CHAMPION
At 20th levei. you embody the power of the wilds. Vour
Strength and Constitution scores increase by 4. Vour
maximum for those scores is now 24.

PRIMAL

PATHS

Rage burns in every barbarian's heart. a furnace
that drives him or her toward greatness. Different

A"RT

J

('

L

SE

Your totem animal might be an animal related to those
listed here but more appropriate to your homeland.
For example. you could choose a hawk or vulture in
place of an eagle.
Bear. While raging. you have resistance to ali damage
except psychic damage. The spirit of the bear makes you
tough enough to stand up to any punishment.
Eagle. While you're raging and aren't wearing
heavy armor. other creatures have disadvantage on
opportunity attack rolls against YOU.and you can use the
Dash action as a bonus action on your turno The spirit
of the eagle makes you into a predator who can weave
through the fray with ease.
Wolf. While you're raging. your friends have
advantage on melee attack rolls against any creature
within 5 fect ofyou that is hostile to YOU.The spirit of
lhe wolf makes you a leader of hunters.
ASPECT OF THE BEAST

creature IIntil the end of your next turno This effeet ends
if the creatllre ends its turn out of line of sight or more
than 60 feet away from YOU.
If the creature succeeds on its saving throw. you can't
use this feature on that ereature again for 24 hours.
RETALIATION

Starting at 14th levei, when you take damage from
a creature that is within 5 fcet of YOII.you can usc
your reaction to make a melee weapon attack against
that creature.
PATH OF THE TOTEM WARRIOR
The Path of the Totem Warrior is a spiritual journcy, as
the harharian accepts a spirit animal as guide, protcctor,
and inspiration. In battle. your totem spirit fills you
with supernatural might. adding magiral fuel to your
barharian rage.
Most harharian tribes consider a totem animal to bc
kin to a particular elan. [n such cases. it is unusual for
an individual to have more than one totem animal spirit,
though exceptions exisl.

At 6th leveI. you gain a magical benefit based on the
totem animal of your choice. You can choose the same
animal you selected at 3rd levei or a different one.
Bepr. You gain the might of a bear. Your carrying
capacity (including maximum load and maximum lift)
is doubled, and you have advantage 00 Strength checks
made to push, pull. lift, or break ohjects.
Eagle. You gain the eyesight of an eagle. You can
see up to 1 mile away with no difficulty. able to discern
even fine details as though looking at something no
more than 100 feet away from you. Additionally, dim
light doesn't impose disadvantage on your Wisdom
(Perception) checks.
Wolf. You gain the hunting sensibilities of a wolf. You
can track other creatures while traveling at a fast pace,
and you can move stealthily while traveling at a normal
pace (see ,hapter 8 for rules on travei pace).
SPIRIT WALKER

At 10th leveI. you can cast the com mune with nature
spell, but only as a ritual. When you do so, a spiritual
version of one of the animais you ehose for Totem Spirit
or Aspect of the Beast appears to you to convey the
information you seek.
TOTEMIC

SPIRIT

SEEKER

Yours is a path that seeks altunement with the natural
world. giving you a kinship with beasts. At 3rd levei when
you adopt this path. you gain the ability to east the bcast
sense and speak with animaIs spells. but only as rituais,
as deseribcd in ehapter 10.
TOTEM

SPIRIT

AI 3rd leveI. when you adopt this path, you choose a
totem spirit and gain its feature. Vou must make or
acquire a physiral totem ohject-an amulet or similar
adornment-that
incorporates fur or feathers. c1aws.
teeth, or bones of the totem animal. AI your option, you
also gain minar physical altributes that are reminiscent
ofyour totem spiril. For example. ifyou have a bear
totem spirit. yott might be unusually hairy and thick.
skinned, or if your totem is the eagle. your eyes turn
bright yellow.
PART I

5°

I CLASSES

ATTUNEMENT

AI 14th levei, you gain a magical benefit based on a
totem animal ofyour choice. Vou can ehoose the same
animal you selected previously or a different one.
Bear. While you're raging. any creature within 5 feet
of you that's hostile to you has disadvantage on altaek
rolls against targets other than you or another eharaeter
with this feature. An enemy is immune to this effeet if it
can't see or hear you or if it ean't be frightened.
Eagle. While raging. you have a flying speed equal to
your current walking speed. This benefit works only in
short bursts; you fali ifyou end your turn in the air and
nothing else is holding you aloft.
Wolf. While you're raging, you ean use a honus aetion
on your turn to knoek a Large or smaller ereature prone
when you hit it with melee weapon attack.

BARD
Humming as she traces her fingers over an ancient
monument in a long-forgotten ruin, a half-elf in rugged
leathers finds knowledge springing into her mind,
conjured forth by the magic of her song-knowledge
of the people who constructed the monument and the
mythic saga it depicts.
A stern human warrior bangs his sword rhythmically
against his scale mai!, setting the tempo for his war chant
and exhorting his companions to bravery and heroismo
The magic of his song fortifies and emboldens them.
Laughing as she tunes her cittern, a gnome weaves
her subtle magic over the assembled nobles, ensuring
that her companions' words will be well received.
Whether scholar, skald, ar scoundrel, a bard weaves
magic through words and music to inspire allies,
demoralize foes, manipulate minds, create
illusions, and even heal wounds.

MUSIC AND MAGIC
In the worlds of 0&0, words and music are
not just vibrations of air, but vocalizations with
power ali their own. The bard is a master of song,
speech, and the magic they contain. Bards say
that the multiverse was spoken into existence, that the
words of the gods gave it shape, and that echoes of these
primordial Words of Creation still resound throughout
the cosmos. The music of bards is an attempt to snatch
and harness those echoes, subtly woven into their
spells and powers.
The greatest strength of bards is their sheer
versatility. Many bards prefer to stick to the sidelines
in combat, using their magic to inspire their allies and
hinder their foes fram a distance. But bards are capable
of defending themselves in melee if necessary, using
their magic to bolster their swords and armar. Their
spells lean toward charms and illusions rather than
blatantly destructive spells. They have a wide-ranging
knowledge of many subjects and a natural aptitude
that lets them do almost anything well. Bards become
masters of the talents they set their minds to perfecting,
from musical performance to esoteric knowledge.

LEARNING

FROM EXPERIENCE

True bards are not common in the world. Not every
minstrel singing in a tavern ar jester cavorting in a royal
court is a bardo Oiscovering the magic hidden in music
requires hard study and some measure of natural talent
that most traubadours and jongleurs lack. lt can be hard
to spot the difference between these performers and true
bards, though. A bard's life is spent wandering acrass
the land gathering lore, telling stories, and living on the
gratitude of audiences, much like any other entertainer.
But a depth of knowledge, a leveI of musical skill, and a
touch of magic set bards apart fram their fellows.
Only rarely do bards settle in one place for long, and
their natural desire to traveI-to find new tales to tell,
new skills to learn, and new discoveries beyond the
horizon-makes
an adventuring career a natural calling.
Every adventure is an opportunity to learn, practice a
variety of skills, enter long-forgotten tombs, discover lost
P~RT I

Cl:'\SSES

•
QUICK

BUILD

You can make a bard quickly by
following these suggestions. First,
Charisma should be your highest
ability score, followed by Dexterity.
Second, choose the entertainer
background. Third, choose the dancing Jights and
vicious mockery cantrips, along with the following
1st-leveI spells: charm person, detect magic, heaJing
word, and thunderwave.

CLASS FEATURES
As a bard, you gain the following class features.
HIT POlNTS

Hit Dice: Id8 per bard levei
Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: Id8 (or 5) + your
Constitution modifier per bard leveI after 1st
works of magic, decipher old tomes, traveI to strange
places, or encounter exotic creatures. Bards love to
accompany heroes to witness their deeds firsthand. A
bard who can tell an awe-inspiring story from personal
experience earns renown among other bards. Indeed,
after telling so many stories about heroes accomplishing
mighty deeds, many bards take these themes to heart
and assume heroic roles themselves.

CREATING

A BARD

Bards thrive on stories, whether those stories are true
or not. Your character's background and motivations
are not as important as the stories that he or she tells
about them. Perhaps you had a secure and mundane
childhood. There's no good story to be told about that,
so you might paint yourself as an orphan raised by a hag
in a dismal swamp. ar your childhood might be worthy
of a story. Some bards acquire their magical music
through extraordinary means, including the inspiration
of fey or other supernatural creatures.
Did you serve an apprenticeship, studying under a
mas ter, following the more experienced bard until you
were ready to strike out on your own? ar did you attend
a college where you studied bardic lore and practiced
your musical magic? Perhaps you were a young runaway
or orphan, befriended by a wandering bard who became
your mentor. ar you might have been a spoiled noble
child tutored by a master. Perhaps you stumbled into the
clutches of a hag, making a bargain for a musical gift in
addition to your life and freedom, but at what cost?

52

PART I I CLASSES

PROFICIENCIES

Armor: Light armor
Weapons: Simple weapons, hand crossbows,
longswords, rapiers, shortswords
Tools: Three musical instruments of your choice
Saving Throws: Dexterity, Charisma
Skills: Choose any three
EQUlPMENT

You start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background:
(a) a rapier, (b) a longsword, or (c) any simple weapon
(a) a diplomat's pack or (b) an entertainer's pack
(a) a lute or (b) any other musical instrument

Leather armor and a dagger

SPELLCASTING
Vou have learned to untangle and reshape the fabric of
reality in harmony with your wishes and musico Your
spells are part of your vast repertoire, magic that you
can tune to different situations. See chapter 10 for the
general rules of spellcasting and chapter li for the
bard spelllist.
CANTRIPS

Vou know two cantrips ofyour choice from the bard
spelllist. Vou learn additional bard cantrips of your
choice at higher leveIs, as shown in the Cantrips Known
column of the Bard table.

Levei

Proficiency
Bonus

Features

Cantrips
Known

Spells
Known

1st

1st

+2

Spellcasting,

(d6)

2

4

2

2nd

+2

Jaek of Ali Trades, Song of Rest (d6)

2

5

3

Bardic Inspiration

-Spell

Slots per Spell Level-

3rd

4th

2nd

3rd

+2

Bard College, Expertise

2

6

4

2

4th

+2

Ability Score Improvement

3

7

4

3

5th

+3

Bardic Inspiration

3

8

4

3

2

3
3

9
10

4
4

3
3

3
3

1

3

3

2

(d8),

Font of Inspiration
Countercharm,
Bard College feature

5th

6th
7th

+3
+3

8th

+3

Ability Score Improvement

3

11

4

Song of Rest (d8)
Bardic Inspiration (dl0), Expertise,

3
4

12

4

3

3

3

1

14

4

3

3

3

2

9th

+4

10th

+4

11th

+4

4

15

4

3

3

3

2

12th

+4

Ability Score Improvement

4

15

4

3

3

3

2

13th

+5

4

16

4

18

3
3

3
3

2

+5

4
4

3

14th

Song of Rest (d10)
MagicalSecrets,

3

2

15th
16th

+5
+5

4

3

3

+6
+6

3
3
3

+6
+6

4
4

4
4
4

19th
20th

MagicalSecrets
Ability Score Improvement

19
20
22
22

Superior

3
3

3

4

4
4

3
3
3
3

3
3
3
3

2

17th
18th

4
4
4

19

Ability Score Improvement
Song of Rest (d12)

3
3

6th

7th

1
1
1
1

1
1
1
1

2

1
2

8th

9th

Magical Secrets

Bard College feature
Bardic Inspiration (d12)

Inspiration

SPELL SLOTS

The Bard table shows how many spell slots you have to
cast your spells of 1st levei and higher. To cast one of
these spells. you must expend a slot of the spell's levei
ar higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you
finish a long resl.
For example. if you know the 1st-levei spell cure
wounds and have a 1st-levei and a 2nd-levei spell slot
available, you ean cast cure wounds using either slol.
SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVEL AND H IGHER

Vou know four 1st-levei spells of your choice from the
bard spelllist.
The Spells Known column of the Bard table shows
when you learn more bard spells of your choice. Each of
these spells must be of a levei for which you have spell
slots, as shown on the table. For instance, when you
reach 3rd leveI in this c1ass, you can learn one new spell
of 1st ar 2nd leveI.
Additionally, when you gain a levei in this c1ass, you
can choose one of the bard spells you know and replace
il wilh anolher spell from the bard spelllist, which also
must be of a levei for which you have spell slots.
SPELLCASTING

ABILITY

Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your bard
spells. Your magic comes from the heart and soul you
pau r into the performance of your music ar oration.
Vou use your Charisma whenever a spell refers to your
spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your Charisma

22

3

3

2
2
3

2

modifier when setting the saving throw DC for a bard
spell you cast and when making an attack roll with one.
Spell save DC ~ 8 + your proficiency
your Charisma

Spell attack modifier ~ your proficiency
your Charisma

bonus +

modifier
bonus +

modifier

RITUAL CASTING

Vou can cast any bard spell you know as a ritual if that
spell has the ritual tag.
SPELLCASTING

Focus

Vou can use a musical instrument (found in chapter 5)
as a spellcasting focus for your bard spells.

BARDIC INSPIRATION
Vou can inspire others through stirring words or musico
To do so, you use a bonus action on your turn to choose
one creature other than yourselfwithin 60 feet ofyou
who can hear YOU. That creature gains one Bardic
lnspiration die, a d6.
Once within the next 10 minutes, lhe crealure can roll
the die and add the number rolled to one ability check,
attack roll, ar saving throw it makes. The creature can
wait until after it rolls lhe d20 before deciding to use the
Bardic Inspiration die, but must decide hefore the DM
says whether the roll succeeds ar fails. Once the Bardic
Inspiration die is rolled. it is losl. A creature can have
only one Bardic Inspiration die at a time.

PARl

I I Cl-\SSES

53

Vou can use this feature a number of times equal
to your Charisma modifier (a minimum of once). Vou
regain any expended uses when you finish a long rest.
Your Bardic Inspiration die changes when you reach
certain leveis in this class. The die becomes a d8 at 5th
levei, a dlO at 10th levei, and a d12 at 15th leveI.

MAGICAL

SECRETS

Starting at 2nd levei, you can add half your proficiency
bonus, rounded down, to any ability check you make that
doesn't already include your proficiency bonus.

By 10th leveI, you have plundered magical knowledge
from a wide spectrum of disciplines. Choose two spells
from any class, including this one. A spell you choose
must be Dfa levei you can cast, as shown on the Bard
table, or a cantrip.
The chosen spells count as bard spells for you and are
included in the number in the Spells Known column Df
the Bard table.
Vou learn two additional spells from any class at 14th
leveI and again at 18th leveI.

SONG OF REST

SUPERIOR

jACK

OF ALL TRADES

Beginning at 2nd levei, you can use soothing music or
oration to help revitalize your wounded allies during
a short rest. If you or any friendly creatures who can
hear your performance regain hit points atthe end Df
the short rest, each of those creatures regains an extra
Id6 hit points.
The extra hit points increase when you reach certain
leveis in this class: to ld8 at9th levei, to Idl0 at 13th
levei, and to Idl2 at 17th leveI.

INSPIRATION

At 20th levei, when you roll initiative and have no uses
DfBardic Inspiration left, you regain one use.

BARD COLLEGES
The way Dfa bard is gregarious. Bards seek each
other out to swap songs and stories, boast of their
accomplishments, and share their knowledge. Bards
form loose associations, which they call colleges, to
facilitate their gatherings and preserve their traditions.

BARD COLLEGE
At 3rd levei, you delve into the advanced techniques Df
a bard college Dfyour choice: the College of Lore or the
College of Valor, both detailed atthe end of the class
description. Your choice grants you features at 3rd levei
and again at 6th and 14th leveI.

EXPERTISE
At 3rd leveI, choose two of your skill proficiencies. Your
proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability check you
make that uses either of the chosen proficiencies.
At 10th leveI, you can choose another two skill
proficiencies to gain this benefit.

ABILITY

SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th levei, you can increase one ability score Dfyour
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores Df
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.

FONT OF INSPIRATION
Beginning when you reach 5th leveI, you regain ali of
your expended uses of Bardic Inspiration when you
finish a short or long rest.

COUNTERCHARM
At 6th levei, you gain the ability to use musica!notes or
words of power to disrupt mind-influencing effects. As
ao actioo, you can slaft a perfonnance that lasts until

the end of your nextturn. During that time, you and any
friendly creatures within 30 feet of you have advantage
on saving throws against being frightened or charmed.
A creature must be able to hear you to gain this benefit.
The performance ends early if you are incapacitated or
silellced or if you voluntarily end it (no action required).

5+

PART I I CLASSES

COLLEGE

OF LORE

Bards Dfthe College of Lore know something about
most things, collecting bits Dfknowledge from sources
as diverse as scholarly tomes and peasant tales.
Whether singing folk ballads in taverns or elaborate
compositions in royal courts, these bards use their gifts
to hold audiences spellbound. When the applause dies
down, the audience members might find themselves
questioning everything they held to be true, from their
faith in the priesthood of the localtemple to their
loyalty to the king.
The loyalty Dfthese bards Iies in the pursuit Dfbeauty
and truth, not in fealty to a monarch or following the
tenets of a deity. A noble who keeps such a bard as a
herald or advisor knows that the bard would rather be
honest than politic.
The college's members gather in libraries and
sometimes in actual colleges, complete with classrooms
and dormitories, to share their lore with one another.
They also meet at festivaIs or affairs of state, where they
can expose corruption, unravellies, and poke fun at selfimportant figures of authority.
BONUS PROFICIENCIES

When you join the College of Lore at 3rd levei, you gain
proficiency with three skills of your choice.
CUTTING

WORDS

AIso at 3rd levei, you learn how to use your witto
distract, confuse, and otherwise sap the confidence and
competence of others. When a creatare that you can
see within 60 feet of you makes an atlack roll, an ability
check, or a damage roll, you can use your reaction to
expend one Dfyour uses of Bardic Inspiration, rolling
a Bardic Inspiration die and subtracting the number
rolled from the creature's roll. Vou can choose to use
this feature after the creature makes its roll, but before
the DM determines whether the atlack roll or ability

check succeeds or fails, or befure the creature deals its
damage. The creature is imlllune if it can't hear you or if
it's imlllune tu being charmed.

songs, they inspire others to reach the same heights of
accomplishment as the heroes of old.

ADDITIONAL

When you join the College of Valor at 3rd levei, you
gain proficiency with medium armor, shields, and
martial weapuns.

BONUS PROFICIENCIES
MAGICAL SECRETS

At 6th leveI, yuu learn twu spells of yuur chuice from any
class. A spell yuu choose must be of a levei you call cast,
as shown on the Bard table, or a cantrip. The chosen
spells CUUlltas bard spells for yuu but don't count
against the number of bard spells you know.
PEERLESS SKILL

Starting at 14th leveI, when you IlIake an ability check.
you can expend one use of Bardic Inspiration. RolI a
Bardic lllspiration die and add the numbcr rolled to
your ability check. You call choose to do so after rou roll
the die for the ability check, but before the DM tells rou
whether yuu succeed ur fai!'

COMBAT INSPIRATION

AIso at 3rd leveI, rou learn to inspire others in battle.
A crcature that has a Bardic lnspiratiun die from you
can roll that die and add the nUlllber rolled to a weapon
damage roll it jusl nlade. Altematively. when an attack
roll is made against the ercature, it can use its reaetion
to roll the Bardie Inspiration die and add the numbcr
rolled to its AC against that attaek. after seeing the roll
but before knowing whelher it hits or misses.
EXTRA ATTACK

COLLEGE OF VALOR
Bards of the Cullege uf Valor are daring skalds whosc
tales keep alive the Illemury uf the great heroes of the
past, and thereby inspire a new generatioll of heroes.
These bards gather in mead halls or around great
bonfires to sing the deeds of the mighty, both past
and present. They traveI the land to witness great
events firsthand and tu ensure that the melllory of
those events doesn't pass frolO the world. With their

Starting at 6th leveI, you can attack twice, instead of
onee, whcnever rou take the Atlaek aetion on your tum.
BATTLE MAGIC

At 14th level, you have rnastered the art of weaving
spellcasting and weapon use into a single harmonious
act. When yuu use your action to cast a bard spell, you
can ll1ake Qne weapon

attack as a bonus actiol1.

PART 1

C.LASSF.S

55

CLERIC
Arms and eyes upraised toward the sun and a prayer
on his lips, an elf begins to glow with an inner light that
spills out to heal his battle-worn companions.
Chanting a song of glory, a dwarf swings his axe
in wide swaths to cut through the ranks of orcs
arrayed against him, shouting praise to the gods with
every foe's falI.
Calling down a curse upon the forces of undeath, a
human lifts her holy symbol as light pours from it to
drive back the zombies crowding in on her companions.
Clerics are intermediaries between the mortal world
and the distant planes of the gods. As varied as the gods
they serve, clerics strive to embody the handiwork of
their deities. No ordinary priest, a cleric is imbued with
divine magic.

HEALERS AND WARRIORS
Divine magic, as the name suggests, is the power of
the gods, lIowing from them into the world. Clerics are
conduits for that power, manifesting it as miraculous
effects. The gods don't grant this power to everyone who
seeks it, but only to those chosen to fuIfi11a high calling.
Harnessing divine magic doesn't rely on study or
training. A cleric might learn formulaic prayers and
ancient rites, but the ability to cast cleric spells relies on
devotion and an intuitive sense of a deity's wishes.
Clerics combine the helpful magic of healing and
inspiring their allies with spells that harm and hinder
foes. They can provoke awe and dread, lay curses of
plague or poison, and even call down liames from heaven
to consume their enemies. For those evildoers who will
benefit most from a mace to the head, clerics depend on
their combat training to let them wade into melee with
the power of the gods on their side.

DIVINE AGENTS
Not every acolyte or officiant at a tem pIe or shrine is a
cleric. Some priests are called to a simple life of temple
service, carrying out their gods' will through prayer and
sacrifice, not by magic and strength of arms. In some
cities, priesthood amounts to a political office, viewed
as a stepping stone to higher positions of authority and
involving no communion with a god at alI. True clerics
are rare in most hierarchies.
When a cleric takes up an adventuring life, it is usually
because his or her god demands it. Pursuing the goals
of the gods often involves braving dangers beyond the
walls of civilization, smiting evil or seeking holy relics in
ancient tombs. Many clerics are also expected to protect
PART 1 I CLASSES

THE CLERIC

Levei

Proficieney
Bonus

1st

+2

Spellcasting,

2nd

+2

Channel

Features
Divine Domain

Divinity (l/rest),

Divine Domain

Cantrips
Known

1st

3

2

3

3

2nd

-Spell

Slots per Spell Level-

3rd

4th

3rd

+2

3

4

2

+2

Ability Seore Improvement

4

4

3

5th

+3

Destroy

Undead

(CR 1/2)

4

4

3

2

6th

+3

Channel

Divinity (2/rest),

4

4

3

3

4

4

3

3

1

4

4

3

3

2

7th

+3

8th

+3

9th

+4

10th

+4

(CR 1), Divine Domain

Destroy

Undead

Divine Intervention

4

4

3

3

3

1

5

4

3

3

3

2

11th

+4

Destroy

(CR 2)

5

4

3

3

3

2

+4

Ability Seore Improvement

5

4

3

3

3

2

13th

+5

5

4

3

3

3

2

+5

5

4

3

3

3

2

3

3

3

2

Destroy

Undead

(CR 3)

15th

+5

5

4

16th

+5

Ability Seore Improvement

5

4

3

3

3

2

17th

+6

Destroy

5

4

3

3

3

2

Undead

8th

9th

feature

12th

14th

7th

feature

Ability Seore Improvement,

Undead

6th

feature

4th

Divine Domain

5th

(CR 4),

Divine Domain feature
18th

+6

Channel

Divinity (3/rest)

5

4

3

3

3

3

1

1

19th

+6

Ability Seore Improvement

5

4

3

3

3

3

2

1

20th

+6

Divine Intervention

5

4

3

3

3

3

2

2

improvement

their deities' worshipers, which ean mean fighting
rampaging ores, negotiating peaee between warring
nations, or sealing a portal that would allow a demon
prinee to enter the world.
Most adventuring clerics maintain some eonneetion to
established temples and orders of their faiths. A temple
might ask for a clerie's aid, or a high priest might be in a
position to demand il.

CREATING

A CLERIC

As you ereate a clerie, the most important question to
eonsider is whieh deity to serve and what principies you
want your eharaeter to embody, Appendix B includes
Iists of many of the gods of the multiverse, Cheek with
your DM to learn whieh deities are in your eampaign.
Onee you've ehosen a deity, eonsider your cleric's
relationship to that god, Did you enter this servi cc
willingly? ar did the god ehoose you, impelling you into
service with no regard for your wishes? How do the
tem pie priests of your faith regard you: as a ehampion
or a troublemaker? What are your ultimate goals? Does
your deity have a special task in mind for you? ar are
you striving to prove yourself worthy of a great quest?
QUICK

BUILD

Vou ean make a cleric quiekly by following these
suggestions. First, Wisdom should be your highest
ability seore, followed by Strength or Constitution.
Seeond, ehoose the aeolyte baekground.

CLASS FEATURES
As a clerie, you gain the following class features.
HIT POINTS

Hit Dice: 1d8 per clerie levei
Hit Points at 1st Levei: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher Leveis: 1d8 (or 5) + your
Constitution modifier per clerie levei after 1st
PROFICIENCIES

Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields
Weapons: Ali simple weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills: Choose two from History, lnsight, Medicine,
Persuasion, and Religion
EQ.UIPMENT

Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your baekground:
(a) a mace or (b) a warhammer (if proficient)
(a) seale mai!, (b) leather armor, or (c) eha;n mai! (if
proficient)
(a) a light erossbow and 20 bolts or (b) any simple
weapon
(a) a priest's paek or (b) an explorer's paek
A shield and a holy symbol

Po\RT 1

CL'\

SES

5i

SPELLCASTING
As a conduit for divine power, you can cast cleric spells.
See chapter 10 for the general rules of spellcasting and
chapter 11 for the cleric spelllist.

SPELLCASTING

CANTRIPS

At 1st levei, you know three cantrips of your choice from
the cleric spelllist. Vou learn additional cleric cantrips
of your choice at higher leveis, as shown in the Cantrips
Known column of the Cleric table.
PREPARING AND CASTING

Vou can change your list of prepared spells when you
finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of cleric spells
requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at least 1
minute per spelllevel for each spell on your listo

SPELLS

The Cleric table shows how many spell slots you have
to cast your spells of 1st levei and higher. To cast one of
these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's levei
or higher. Vou regain all expended spell slots when you
finish a long rest.
Vou prepare the list of cleric spells that are available
for you to cast, choosing from the cleric spelllist. When
you do 50, choose a number of cleric spells equal to
your Wisdom modifier + your cleric levei (minimum of
one spell). The spells must be of a leveI for which you
have spell slots.
For example, if you are a 3rd-Ievel c1eric, you have four
1st-levei and two 2nd-levei spell slots. With a Wisdom
of 16, your list of prepared spells can include six spells
of 1st or 2nd levei, in any combination. ]f you prepare
the 1st-levei spell cure wounds, you can cast it using
a 1st-levei or 2nd-levei slot. Casting the spell doesn't
remove it from your list of prepared spells.

ABILITY

Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your cleric spells.
The power of your spells comes from your devotion to
your deity. Vou use your Wisdom whenever a c1eric spell
refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use
your Wisdom modifier when setting the saving throw
DC for a cleric spell you cast and when making an
attack roll with one.
Spell save De ~ 8 + your proficiency
your Wisdom modifier
Spell attack modifier

= your

your Wisdom

proficiency

bonus +

bonus +

modifier

RITUAL CASTING

Vou can cast a cleric spell as a ritual if that spell has the
ritual tag and you have the spell prepared.
SPELLCASTING

Focus

Vou can use a holy symbol (found in chapter 5) as a
spellcasting focus for your cleric spells.

DIVINE

DOMAIN

Choose one domain related to your deity: Knowledge,
Life, Light, Nature, Tempest, Trickery, or War. Each
domain is detailed at the end of the class description,
and each one provides examples of gods associated
with it. Your choice grants you domain spells and olher
features when you choose it at 1st leveI. It also grants
you additional ways to use Channel Divinity when you
gain that feature at 2nd levei, and additional benefits at
6th, 8th, and 17th leveis.
DOMAIN

SPELLS

Each domain has a list of spells-its domain spellsthat you gain at the c1eric leveis noted in the domain
description. Once you gain a domain spell, you always
have it prepared, and it doesn't count against the
number of spells you can prepare each day.
If you have a domain spell that doesn't appear on the
cleric spelllist, the spell is nonetheless a cleric spell for YOU.

CHANNEL

DIVINITY

At 2nd levei, you gain the ability to channel divine
energy directly from your deity, using that energy to fuel
magical effects. Vou start with two such effects: Turn
Undead and an effect determined by your domain. Some
domains grant you additional effects as you advance in
leveis, as noted in the domain description.
When you use your Channel Divinity. you choose
which effect to create. Vou must then finish a short or
long rest to use your Channel Divinity again.
Some Channel Divinity effects require saving throws.
When you use such an effect from this class, the DC
equals your c1eric spell save DC.
Beginning at 6th leveI, you can use your Channel
Divinity twice between rests, and beginning at 18th levei,

58

PART 1 I CLASSES

you can use it three times between rests. When you finish
a short or long rest, you regain your expended uses.
CHANNEL

DIVINITY:

TURN UNDEAD

As an action, you present your holy symbol and speak a
prayer censuring the undead. Each undead that can see
or hear you within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom
saving throw. If the creature fails its saving throw, it is
turned for 1 minute or until it takes any damage.
A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move
as far away from you as it can, and it can't willingly
move to a space within 30 feet of you. lt also can't take
reactions. For its action, it can use only the Dash action
or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from
moving. If there's nowhere to move, the creature can use
the Dodge action.

ABILITY

SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you reach 4th leveI, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability score of your
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.

DESTROY UNDEAD
Starting at 5th leveI, when an undead fails its saving
throw against your Turn Undead feature, the creature is
instantly destroyed if its challenge rating is at or below a
certain threshold, as shown in the Destroy Undead table.
DESTROY

UNDEAD

Cleric Levei

Destroys Undead ofCR ...

5th

1/2 or lower

8th
11th

1 or lower
2 or lower

14th
17th

3 or lower
4 or lower

DIVINE

INTERVENTION

Beginning at 10th levei, you can call on your deity to
intervene on your behalf when your need is great.
1mploring your deity's aid requires you to use your
action. Describe the assistance you seek, and roll
percentile dice. If you roll a number equal to or lower
than your cleric leveI, your deity intervenes. The DM
chooses the nature of the intervention; the effect of any
cleric spell or cleric domain spell would be appropriate.
lf your deity intervenes, you can't use this feature
again for 7 days. Otherwise, you can use it again after
you finish a long rest.
At 20th leveI, your call for intervention succeeds
automatically, no roll required.

domains of Knowledge, Life, and Light. As a cleric, you
choose one aspect of your deity's portfolio to emphasize,
and you are granted powers related to that domain.
Your choice might correspond to a particular sect
dedicated to your deity. Apollo, for example, could be
worshiped in one region as Phoebus ("radiant") Apollo,
emphasizing his influence over the Light domain,
and in a different place as Apollo Acesius ("healing"),
emphasizing his association with the Life domain.
Alternatively, your choice of domain could simply be a
malter of personal preference, the aspect of the deity
that appeals to you most.
Each domain's description gives examples of deities
who have influence over that domain. Gods are included
from the worlds of the Forgotten Realms, Greyhawk,
Dragonlance, and Eberron campaign seltings, as well as
from the Celtic, Greek, Norse, and Egyptian pantheons
of antiquity.

KNOWLEDGE

DOMAIN

The gods of knowledge-including
Oghma, Boccob,
Gilean, Aureon, and Thoth-value learning and
understanding above ali. Some teach that knowledge is
to be gathered and shared in libraries and universities,
or promote the practical knowledge of craft and
invention. Some deities hoard knowledge and keep its
secrets to themselves. And some promise their followers
that they will gain tremendous power if they unlock the
secrets of the multiverse. Followers of these gods study
esoteric lore, collect old tomes, delve into the secret
places of the earth, and learn ali they cano Some gods
of knowledge pro mote the practical knowledge of craft
and invention, including smith deities like Gond, Reorx,
Onatar, Moradin, Hephaestus, and Goibhniu.
KNOWLEDCE

DOMAIN

Cleric Levei

Spells

1st
3rd

command,

5th
7th

9th

SPELLS

identify

augury, suggestion
nondeteetion, speak with dead
arcane eye, eanJusion
legend /ore, scrying

BLESSINGS OF KNOWLEDGE

At 1st leveI, you learn two languages of your choice.
Vou also become proficient in your choice of two of the
following skills: Arcana, History, Nature, or Religion.
Your proficiency bonus is doubled for any ability check
you make that uses either of those skills.
CHANNEL DIVINITY:
KNOWLEDGE OF THE AGES

DIVINE DOMAINS

Starting at 2nd leveI, you can use your Channel Divinity
to tap into a divine well of knowledge. As an action,
you choose one skill or tool. For 10 minutes, you have
proficiency with the chosen skill or to01.

In a pantheon, every deity has influence over different
aspects of mortallife and civilization, called a deity's
domain. Ali the domains over which a deity has
influence are called the deity's portfolio. For example,
the portfolio of the Greek god Apollo includes the

At 6th leveI, you can use your Channel Divinity to read a
creature's thoughts. Vou can then use your access to the
creature's mind to command it.

CHANNEL

DIVINITY:

READ THOUGHTS

P'\RT

1

C I ASSES

59

As an action, choose one creature that you can see
within 60 feet of you. That creature must make a
Wisdom saving throw. If the creature succeeds on the
saving throw, you can't use this feature on it again until
you finish a long resl.
If the creature fails its save, you can read its surface
thoughts (those foremost in its mind, reflecting its
current emotions and what it is actively thinking
about) when it is within 60 feet of you. This effect lasts
for I minute.
During that time, you can use your action to end this
effect and cast the suggestion spell on the creature
without expending a spell si 01. The target automatically
fails its saving throw against the spell.
POTENT

SPELLCASTING

Starting at 8th levei, you add your Wisdom modifier to
the damage you deal with any cleric cantrip.
VISIONS

OF THE PAST

Starting at 17th levei, you can call up visions of the
past that relate to an object you hold or your immediate
surroundings. Vou spend at least I minute in meditation
and prayer, then receive dreamlike, shadowy glimpses
of recent events. Vou can meditate in this way for a
number of minutes equal to your Wisdom score and
must maintain concentration during that time, as if you
were casting a spe11.
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a short or long resto
Object Reading. Holding an object as you meditate,
you can see visions of the object's previous owner.
After meditating for I minute, you learn how the owner
acquired and lost the object, as well as the most recent
significant event involving the object and that owner.
If the object was owned by another creature in the
recent past (within a number of days equal to your
Wisdom score), you can spend I additional minute
for each owner to learn the same information about
that creature.
Area Reading. As you meditate, you see visions
of recent events in your immediate vicinity (a room,
street, tunnel, clearing, or the like, up to a 50-foot cube),
going back a number of days equal to your Wisdom
score. For each minute you meditate, you learn about
one significant event, beginning with the most recenl.
Significant events typically involve powerful emotions,
such as battles and betrayals, marriages and murders,
births and funerais. However, they might also include
more mundane events that are nevertheless important
in your current situation.

LIFE DOMAIN
The Life domain focuses on the vibrant positive
energy-one of the fundamental forces of the universethat sustains alllife. The gods of life pro mote vitality
and health through healing the sick and wounded,
caring for those in need, and driving away the forces of
death and undeath. Almost any non-evil deity can claim
influence over this domain, particularly agricultural
deities (such as Chauntea, Arawai, and Demeter), sun
gods (such as Lathander, Pelor, and Re-Horakhty), gods

60

PART 1 , CLASSES

of healing or endurance (such as IlIllatcr, Mishakal,
Apollo, and Diancecht), and gods of home and
community (such as Hestia, Hathor, and Boldrei).
LIFE DOMAIN
Cleric Levei

SPELLS

Spells

b/ess, cure wounds
lesser restoration, spiritual weapon
beacon ofhope, revivify
death ward, guardian offaith
mass cure wounds, roise dead

1st
3 rd
5th
7th
9th

BONUS PROFICIENCY

When you choose this domain at Ist levei, you gain
proficiency with heavy armor.
DISCIPLE

OF LIFE

Also starting at 1st levei, your healing spells are more
effective. Whenever you use a spell of 1st levei or higher
to restore hit points to a creature, the creature regains
additional hit points equal to 2 + the spell's leveI.
CHANNEL

DIVINITY:

PRESERVE LIFE

Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your Channel Divinity
to heal the badly injured.
As an action, you present your holy symbol and
evoke healing energy that can restorc a number of hit
points equal to five times your cleric leveI. Choose any
creatures within 30 feet of you, and divide those hit
points among them. This feature can restore a ereature
to no more than half of its hit point maximum. Vou can't
use this feature on an undead or a construel.
BLESSED HEALER

Beginning at 6th levei, the healing spclls you cast on
others heal you as well. When you cast a spell of 1st
levei or higher that restores hit points to a creature
other than you, you regain hit points equal to 2 + the
spell's leveI.
DIVINE

STRIKE

At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns
when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can
cause the attack to deal an extra Id8 radiant damage to
the targel. When you reach 14th levei, the extra damage
increases to 2d8.
SUPREM E HEALING

Starting at 17th levei, when you would normally roll
one or more dice to restore hit points with a spell, you
instead use the highest number possible for each die.
For example, instead of restoring 2<16hit points to a
creature, you restore 12.

LIGHT DOMAIN
Gods of light-including Hehn, Lathander, Pholtus,
Branchala, the Silver Flame, Be1enus, Apollo, and
Re-Horakhty-promote
the ideais af rebirth and
renewal, truth, vigilance, and beauty, often using the
symbol of the sun. Some af thcse go<ls are portrayed
as the sun itself or as a charioteer who guides the sun

across the sky. Olhers are tireless sentinels whose eyes
pierce every shadow and see through every deception.
Some are deities of heauty and artistry. who teach that
art is a vehic1e for the soul"s improvemenl. Clerics of a
god oflight are enlightened souls infused with radiance
and the power of (heir gods' discerning vision, charged
with chasing away lies and burning away darkness.
LICHT

DOMAIN

Cleric Levei

Spells

burning hand',jaerie fire
Jlaming 'phere, ,eorching ray
day/ight,fireball
guardian offoith, wall offire
Jlame ,trike, ,crying

1st
3rd
5th
7th
9th
BONUS

SPELLS

CANTRIP

When you choose this domain at 1st levei, you gain the
Jight cantrip ifyou don't already know il.
WARDING

FLARE

Also at 1st leveI, YOll can interpose divine light between
yourself and an altacking enemy. When you are altacked
bya creature within 30 feet of you that you can see,
you can use your reaction to impose disadvantage on
the attack roll, causing light to fiare before the attacker
before it hits or misses. An attacker that can't be blinded
is immune to this feature.
Vou can use this feature a number of times equal to
your Wisdom modifier (a minimum of once). Vou regain
ali expended uses when you finish a long resl.
CHANNEL

DIVINITY:

RADIANCE

OF THE DAWN

Starting at 2nd leveI, you can use your Channel Divinity
to harness sunlight, banishing darkness and dealing
radiant damage to your foes.
As an action, you present your holy symbol, and any
magical darkness within 30 feet of you is dispelled.
Additionally, each hostile creature within 30 feel of
you must make a Constitution saving throw. A creature
takes radiant damage equal to 2d 1O + your c1eric leveI
on a failed saving throw, and half as much damage on a
successful one. A creature that has total cover from you
is not affected.
IMPROVED

FLARE

Starting at 6th levei, you can also use your Warding
Fiare feature when a creature thal you can see within
30 feet of you attacks a creature other than YOU.
POTENT

SPELLCASTING

Starting at 8th leveI, you add your Wisdom modifier to
the damage you deal with any c1eric cantrip.
CORONA

OF LIGHT

Starting at 17th levei, you can use your action to activate
an aura of sunlight that Jasts for 1 minute or until you
dismiss it using another action. Vou emit bright light in
a 60-foot radius and dim light 30 feet beyond tha!. Your
enemies in the bright Iight have disadvalltage on saving
throws against any spell that deals fire or radiant damage.

NATURE DOMAIN
Gods of nature are as varied as the natural world
itself, from illscrutable gods of the deep forests (such
as Silva nus, Obad-Hai, Chislev, Balinor, and Pan) to
friendly deities associated with particular springs and
groves (such as Eldath). Druids revere nature as a
whole and might serve one of these deities, practicing
mysterious rites and reciting all-but-forgolten prayers in
their own secret tongue. But many of these gods have
c1erics as well, champions who take a more active role
in advancing the interests of a particular nature god.
These c1erics might hunt the evil monstrosities that
despoil the woodlands, bless the harvest of the faithful,
or wither the crops of those who anger their gods.
NATURE

DOMAIN

Cleric Levei
1 st

3rd
5th
7th
9th

SPELLS

Spells

animal friend,hip, speak with animais
bark,kin, 'pike growth
plant growth, wind wall
dominate beast, gra'ping vine
inseet plague, tree stride

PART I

CLASSES

6

ACOLYTE OF NATURE

At 1st leveI, you learn one druid cantrip of your choice.
Vou also gain proticiency in one of the following skills of
your choice: Animal Handling, Nature, or Survival.

righteousness or to encourage them to offer sacritices of
propitiation to ward off divine wrath.
TEMPEST

DOMAIN

Cleric Levei
BONUS PROFICIENCY

Also at 1st leveI, you gain proticiency with heavyarmor.
CHANNEL DIVINITY:
AND PLANTS

CHARM ANIMALS

Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your Channel Divinity
to charm animaIs and plants.
As an action, you present your holy symbol and invoke
the name of your deity. Each beast or plant creature that
can see you within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom
saving throw. If the creature fails its saving throw, it is
charmed by you for 1 minute or until it takes damage.
While it is charmed by you, it is friendly to you and other
creatures you designate.
DAMPEN ELEMENTS

Starting at 6th leveI, when you or a creature within 30
feet of you takes acid, cold, tire, lightning, or thunder
damage, you can use your reaction to grant resistance to
the creature against that instance of the damage.
DIVINE

STRIKE

At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns
when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you
can cause the attack to deal an extra Id8 cold, tire, or
lightning damage (your choice) to the target. When you
reach 14th leveI, the extra damage increases to 2d8.

SPELLS

Spells

5th

fog c1oud, thunderwave
gust of wind, shatter
call fightning, sleet storm

7th

control wate" ice storm

9th

destructive wave, insect plague

1st
3rd

BONUS PROFICIENCIES

At 1st leveI, you gain proticiency with martia! weapons
and heavy armor.
WRATH OF THE STORM

Also at 1st levei, you can thunderously rebuke attackers.
When a creature within 5 feet of you that you can see
hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to
cause the creature to make a Dexterity saving throw.
The creature takes 2d8 lightning or thunder damage
(your choice) on a failed saving throw, and half as much
damage on a successful one.
Vou can use this feature a number of times equal to
your Wisdom moditier (a minimum of once). Vou regain
ali expended uses when you tinish a long rest.
CHANNEL

DIVINITY:

DESTRUCTIVE

WRATH

Starting at 2nd leveI, you can use your Channel Divinity
to wield the power of the storm with unchecked ferocity.
When you rolllightning or thunder damage, you can
use your Channel Divinity to deal maximum damage,
instead of rolling.

MASTER OF NATURE

At 17th leveI, you gain the ability to command animais
and plant creatures. While creatures are charmed by
your Charm Animais and Plants feature, you can take
a bonus action on your turn to verbally command what
each of those creatures will do on its next turno

THUNDERBOLT

TEMPEST DOMAIN

At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon
strikes with divine energy. Once on each ofyour turns
when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can
cause the attack to deal an extra ld8 thunder damage to
the target. When you reach 14th levei, the extra damage
increases to 2d8.

DIVINE

Gods whose portfolios include the Tempest domainincluding Talos, Umberlee, Kord, Zeboim, the
Devourer, Zeus, and Thor-govern storms, sea, and
sky. They include gods of lightning and thunder, gods
of earthquakes, some tire gods, and certain gods of
violence, physical strength, and courage. In some
pantheons, a god of this domain rules over other deities
and is known for swift justice delivered by thunderbolts.
In the pantheons of seafaring people, gods of this
domain are ocean deities and the patrons of sailors.
Tempest gods send their clerics to inspire fear in the
common folk, either to keep those folk on the path of

6~

PART 1 I CLASSES

STRIKE

At 6th leveI, when you deallightning damage to a Large
or smaller creature, you can also push it up to 10 feet
away from YOU.
STRIKE

STORMBORN

At 17th levei, you have a flying speed equal to
your current walking speed whenever you are not
underground or indoors.

TRICKERY DOMAIN
Gods of trickery-such as Tymora, Beshaba,
Olidammara, the Traveler, Gari Glittergold, and
Loki-are mischief-makers and instigators who stand
as a constant challenge to the accepted order among
both gods and mortais. They're patrons of thieves,
scoundrels, gamblers, rebels, and liberators. Their
clerics are a disruptive force in the world, puncturing
pride, mocking tyrants, stealing from the rich, freeing
captives, and flouting hollow traditions. They prefer

subterfuge, pranks, deception, and theft rather than
direct confrontation.
TRICKERY

DOMAIN

Clerie levei

Spells

SPELLS

charm persan, disguise seI[
mirror imoge, pass without trace
blink, dispel magic
dimension door, po/ymorph
dominate person, modify memory

1st
3rd
5th

7th
9th

watch over warriors and reward them for their great
deeds. The clerics of such gods excel in battle, inspiring
others to fight the good fight or offering acts ofviolence
as prayers. Gods of war include champions of honor
and chivalry (such as Torm, Heironeous, and KiriJolith) as well as gods of destruction and pillage (such
as Erythnul, the Fury, Gruumsh, and Ares) and gods of
conquest and domination (such as Bane, Hextor, and
Maglubiyet). Other war gods (such as Tempus, Nike,
and Nuada) take a more neutra! stance, promoting war
in ali its manifestations and supporting warriors in any
circumstance.

BLESSING OF THE TRICKSTER

Starting when you choose this domain at 1st levei, you
can use your action to touch a willing creature other
than yourseif to give it advantage on Dexterity (Stealth)
checks. This blessing lasts for I hour or until you use
this feature again.

WAR DOMAIN

Clerie levei

divine favor, shield offaith
magic weapon, spiritual weapon
crusader's mantle, spirit guardians
freedom of movement, stoneskin
fiame strike, hold monster

1 st
3rd

5th
CHANNEL

DIVINITY:

INvOKE

DUPLICITY

Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your Channel Divinity
to create an illusory duplicate of yourself.
As an action, you create a perfect illusion of
yourself that !asts for I minute, or until you lose your
concentration (as if you were concentrating on a spell).
The iIlusion appears in an unoccupied space that you
can see within 30 feet of you. As a bonus action on your
turn, you can move the illusion up to 30 feet to a space
you can see, but it must remain within 120 feet of you.
For the duration, you can cast spells as though you
were in the iIlusion's space, but you must use your own
senses. Additionally, when both you and your illusion
are within 5 feet of a creature that can see the illusion,
you have advantage on attack rolls against that creature,
given how distracting the illusion is to the target.

7th
9th

BONUS PROFICIENCIES

At 1st levei, you gain proficiency with martial weapons
and heavy armor.
WAR PRIEST

From 1st !evel, your god delivers bolts of inspiration to
you while you are engaged in battle. When you use the
Attack action, you can make one weapon attack as a
bonus action.
Vou can use this feature a number of times equal to
your Wisdom modifier (a minimum of once). You regain
ali expended uses when you finish a long rest.
CHANNEL

CHANNEL

DIVINITY:

CLOAK OF SHADOWS

Starting at 6th leveI, you can use your Channel
Divinity to vanish.
As an action, you become invisible until the end of your
next turno You become visible if you attack or cast a spell.
DIVINE

SPELLS

Spells

DIVINITY:

GUIDED

STRIKE

Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your Channel Divinity
to strike with supernatural accuracy. When you make
an attack roll, you can use your Channel Divinity to gain
a +10 bonus to the roll. You make this choice after you
see the roll, but before the DM says whether the attack
hits or misses.

STRIKE

At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon
strikes with poison-a gift from your deity. Once on each
of your turns when you hit a creature with a weapon
attack, you can cause the attack to deal an extra Id8
poison damage to the target. When you reach 14th levei,
the extra damage increases to 2d8.

CHANNEL

DIVINITY:

WAR GOD'S BLESSING

At 6th levei, when a creature within 30 feet of you
makes an attack roll, you can use your reaction to grant
that creature a +10 bonus to the roll, using your Channel
Divinity. Vou make this choice after you see the roll, but
before the DM says whether the attack hits or misses.

IMPROVED DUPLICITY

DIVINE

At 17th levei, you can create up to four duplicates
of yourseif, instead of one, when you use Invoke
Duplicity. As a bonus action on your turn, you can
move any number of them up to 30 feet, to a maximum
range of 120 feet.

At 8th levei, you gain the ability to infuse your weapon
strikes with divine energy. Once on each of your turns
when you hit a creature with a weapon attack, you can
cause the attack to deal an extra Id8 damage of the
same type dealt by the weapon to the target. When you
reach 14th levei, the extra damage increases to 2d8.

STRIKE

WARDoMAIN
War has many manifestations. lt can make heroes of
ordinary people. It can be desperate and horrific, with
acts of cruelty and cowardice eclipsing instances of
excellence and courage. In either case, the gods of war

AVATAR OF BATTLE

At 17th levei, you gain resistance to bludgeoning, piercing,
and slashing damage from nonmagical weapons.

PART 1 I CL-\SSES

DRUID
Holding high a gnarled slaff wrealhed wilh holly, an elf
summons lhe fury of lhe slorm and calls down explosive
bolls of lighlning to smile lhe lorch-carrying orcs who
lhrealen her forest.
Crouching oul of sighl on a high tree branch in lhe
form of a leopard, a human peers oul of lhe jungle aI lhe
slrange conslruclion of a lemple of Evil Elemenlal Air,
keeping a close eye on lhe cullists' aclivilies,
Swinging a blade formed of pure fire, a half-elf
charges inlo a mass of skeletal soldiers, sundering
lhe unnalural magic lhat gives the foul crealures the
mocking semblance of life,
Whelher calling on lhe elemenlal forces of nalure or
emulaling the crealures of lhe animal world, druids are
an embodimenl of nature's resilience, cunning, and fury,
They claim no maslery over nalure. Inslead, lhey see
lhemselves as exlensions of nalure's indomilable will.

POWER OF NATURE
Druids revere nalure above ali, gaining lheir spells and
olher magical powers eilher from the force of nalure
ilself or fram a nalure deily. Many druids pursue a
myslic spiriluality of lranscendent union with nature
ralher than devotion to a divine entity, while others
serve gods of wild nature, animais, or elemental forces.
The ancienl druidic lraditions are sometimes called
the Old Failh, in contrast to the worship of gods in
temples and shrines.
Druid spells are oriented toward nature and animalsthe power of toolh and claw, of sun and moon, of fire
and storm. Druids also gain the ability to take on animal
forms, and some druids make a particular study of this
practice, even to the point where they prefer animal
form to their natural formo

PRESERVE THE BALANCE
For druids, nature exists in a precarious balance. The
four elements that make up a world-air, earth, fire,

P,\RT I

CLASSES

Levei

Proficiency
Bonus

1st

+2

2nd

+2

3rd

+2

4th

+2

Cantrips
Known

1st

Druidic,Spellcasting

2

2

Wild Shape,

2

3

2

4

2

3

4

3

Features

Wild Shape

Druid Cirele

improvement,

2nd

-Spell

Slots per Spell Level-

3rd

4th

5th

6th

7th

8th

9th

Ability Score Improvement
5th

+3

6th

+3

7th

+3

8th

+3

9th

+4

10th

+4

11th

+4

12th

+4

3

4

3

2

Druid Cirele feature

3

4

3

3

3

4

3

3

1

Wild Shape

3

4

3

3

2

3

4

3

3

3

1

4

3

3

3

2

3

3

3

2

3

3

3

2

4

4
4
4
4

3

3

3

2

4

4

3

3

3

2

4

4

3

3

3

2

4

4

3

3

3

2

4

4

3

3

3

2

4

4

3

3

3

3

improvement,

Ability Score Improvement

13th

+5

14th

+5

15th

+5

16th

+5

17th

+6

18th

+6

Druid Circle feature

4
Ability Score Improvement

Druid Cirele feature

Ability Score Improvement

Timeless

Body, Beast Spells

4

19th

+6

Ability Score Improvement

4

4

3

3

3

3

20th

+6

Archdruid

4

4

3

3

3

3

and water-must remain in equilibrium. If one element
were to gain power over the others, the world could be
destroyed, drawn into one of the eJemental planes and
broken apart into its component elements. Thus, druids
oppose cults of Elemental Evil and others who promote
one element to the exclusion of others.
Druids are also concerncd with the deJicate ecological
balance that sustains plant and animallife, and the need
for civilized folk to live in harmony with nature, not in
opposition to it. Druids accept that which is cruel in
nature, and they hate that which is unnatural, including
aberrations (such as beholders and mind f1ayers)
and undead (such as zombies and vampires). Druids
sometimes lead raids against such creatures, espccially
when the monsters encroach on the druids' territory.
Druids arc often found guarding sacred sites or
watching over regions of unspoiled nature. But when a
significant danger arises, threatening nature's balance
or the lands they protecl, druids take on a more active
role in combating the threal, as adventurers.
CREATING

A DRUID

When making a druid, consider why your character has
such a close bond with nature. Perhaps your character
lives in a society where the Old Faith slill thrives, or was
raised bya druid after being abandoned in the depths
of a forcst. Perhaps your character had a dramatic
encounter with the spirits of nature, coming face to
face with a giant eagle or dire wolf and surviving lhe
experience. Maybe your character was born during an
epic storm or a volcanic eruption, which was interpreled

as a sign that becoming a druid
was part of your character's destiny.
Have you aJways been an adventurer
as part of your druidic calling, or did you
first spend time as a caretaker of a sacred
grove or spring? Perhaps your homeland was
befouled by evil, and you took up an adventuring life in
hopes of finding a new home or purpose.
QUICK

BUILD

VOU can

make a druid quickly by following these
suggestions. First, Wisdom should be your highest
ability score, followed by Constitution. Second, choose
the hermit background.

CLASS FEATURES
As a druid, you gain the following class features.
HIT POINTS
Ui! Dice: Id8 per druid levei

Uit Points at 1st Levei: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Ui! Points at Uigher Leveis: Id8 (or 5) + your
Constitution modifier pcr druid levei after 1st
PROFICIENCIES

Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields (druids will
not wear armor or use shields made of metal)
Weapons: Clubs, daggers, darts, javelins, maces,
quarlerstaffs, scimitars, sickles, slings. spears
Tools: Herbalism kit
Saving Throws: Intelligcnce, Wisdom

PART 1 I Cl~SSES

Skills: Choose two from Arcana, Animal
Handling, Insight, Medicine, Nature, Perception,
Religion, and Survival
EQUIPMENT

Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background:
(a) a wooden shield or (b) any simple weapon
(a) a scimitar or (b) any simple melee weapon

Leather armor, an explorer's pack, and a druidic focus

DRUIDIC
Vou know Druidic, the secret language of druids. Vou
can speak the language and use it to leave hidden
messages. Vou and others who know this language
automatically spot such a message. Others spot lhe
message's presence with a successful DC 15 Wisdom
(Perception) check but can't decipher it without magic.

one spell). The spells must be of a levei for which you
have spell slots.
For example, if you are a 3rd-Ievel druid, you have four
1st-levei and two 2nd-levei spell slots, With a Wisdom
of 16, your list of prepared spells can include six spells
of 1st ar 2nd levei, in any combination. If you prepare
the lst.level spell cure wounds, you can cast it using
a 1st-levei ar 2nd-levei slot. Casting the spell doesn't
remove it from your list of prepared spells,
Vou can also change your list of prepared spells when
you finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of druid
spells requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at
least 1 minute per spelllevel for each spell on your list.
SPELLCASTING

SPELLCASTING
Drawing on the divine essence of nature itself, you
can cast spells to shape that essence to your will. See
chapter 10 for the general rules of spellcasting and
chapter 11 for the druid spell list.

Spell save DC~ 8 + your profícíencybonus +
your Wisdom modifier
Spell attack modifier~ your proficiencybonus +
your Wisdom modifier

CANTRIPS

At 1st levei, you know two cantrips of your choice from
the druid spelllist. Vou learn additional druid cantrips
of your choice at higher leveis, as shown in the Cantrips
Known column of the Druid table.
PREPARING

AND CASTING

RITUAL CASTING

Vou can cast a druid spell as a ritual if that spell has the
ritual tag and you have the spell prepared.

SPELLS

Â

~

SACREO PLANTS ANO WOOO

Adruid holds certain plants to be sacred, particularlyalder,
ash, birch,elder, hazel, holly,juniper, mistletoe, oak, rowan,
willow,and yew.Druids often use such plants as part of a
spellcastíng focus, incorporating lengths of oak or yewor
sprigs of mistletoe.
Similarly,a druid uses such woods to make other objects,
such as weapons and shields. Yewis assocíated wíth death
and rebirth, so weapon handles for scimitars or sickles might
be fashioned from il. Ash is assocíated with lifeand oak
with strength. These woods make excellenthafts or whole
weapons, such as c1ubsor quarterstaffs, as wellas shields.
Alderis assocíated wíth air,and it might be used for thrown
such as darts or javelins.

Druids from regions that lackthe plants described here
have chosen other plants to take on similar uses. For
instance, a druid of a desert region might value the yucca
tree and cactus plants.

••

66

PART 1 I CLASSES

Focus

SPELLCASTING

The Druid table shows how many spell slots you have
to cast your spells of 1st leveI and higher. To cast one of
these druid spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's
levei ar higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when
you finish a long rest.
Vou prepare the list of druid spells that are available
for you to cast, choosing from the druid spell list. When
you do so, choose a number of druid spells equal to
your Wisdom modifier + your druid levei (minimum of

weapons,

ABILITY

Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your druid
spells, since your magic draws upon your devotion and
attunement to nature. Vou use your Wisdom whenever
a spell refers to your spellcasting ability. [n addition,
you use your Wisdom modifier when setting the saving
throw DC for a druid spell you cast and when making an
attack roll with one.

••

Vou can use a druidic focus (found in chapter 5) as a
spellcasting focus for your druid spells.

WILD SHAPE
Starting at 2nd levei, you can use your action to
magically assume the shape of a beast that you have
seen before, Vou can use this feature twice. Vou regain
expended uses when you finish a short ar long rest.
Your druid levei determines the beasts you can
transform into, as shown in the Beast Shapes table. At
2nd levei, for example, you can transform into any beast
that has a challenge rating of 1(4 ar lower that doesn't
have a f1yingar swimming speed,
BEAST

SHAPES

Levei Max. CR
2nd
4th

1/4
1/2

8th

1

Example
Limitations
No fiyingor swimming speed Wolf
Crocodile
No fiyingspeed
Giant eagle

Vou can stay in a beast shape for a number of hours
eqllalto halfyollr drllid levei (rollnded down). YOllthen
revert to your normal form unless you expend another
use of this feature. Vou can revert to your normal
form earlier by using a bonus action on your turn, Vou
automatically revert if YOllfali unconscious, drop to
O hit points, or die.
While you are transformed, the following rules apply:

Vour game statistics are replaced by the statistics of
the beast, but you retain your alignment, personality,
and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores. Vou
also retain ali of your skill and saving throw proficiencies, in addition to gaining those of the creature. If
the creature has the same proficiency as you and the
bonus in its stat block is higher than yours, use the
creature's bonus instead of yours. lf the creature has
any legendary or lair actions, you can't use them.
When you transform, you assume the beast's hit
points and Hit Dice. When you revert to your normal
form, you return to the number of hit points you had
before you transformed. However, if you rever! as a
result of dropping to O hit points, any excess damage
carries over to your normal formo For example, if you
take lO damage in animal form and have only 1 hit
point left, you revert and take 9 damage. As long as
the excess damage doesn't reduce your normal form
to O hit points, you aren't knocked unconscious.
Vou can't cast spells, and your ability to speak or
take any action that requires hands is limited to the
capabilities of your beast formo Transforming doesn't
break your concentration on a spell you've already
cast, however, or prevent you from taking actions that
are part of a spell, such as caJl Jightning, that you've
already cast.
Vou retain the benefit of any features from your class,
race, or other source and can use them if the new
form is physically capable of doing so. However, you
can't use any of your special senses, such as darkvision, unless your new form also has that sense.
Vou choose whether your equipment falls to the
ground in your space, merges into your new form, or
is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as normal,
but the DM decides whether it is practical for the new
form to wear a piece of equipment, based on the creature's shape and size. Vour equipment doesn't change
size or shape to match the new
form, and any equipment that
the new form can't wear
must either fali to the
ground or merge with it.
Equipment that merges
with the form has no
effect until you leave
the formo

DRUID CIRCLE
At 2nd levei, you choose to
identify with a circle of druids:
the Circle of the Land or the Circle of the Moon, both
detailed at the end of the class description. Vour choice
grants you features at 2nd levcl and again at 6th, 10th,
and 14th leveI.

ABILITY

SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability score of
your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores
of your choicc by 1. As normal, you can't increase an
ability score above 20 using this feature.

TIMELESS BODY
Starting at 18th leveI, the primaI magic that you wield
causes you to age more slowly. For every 10 years that
pass, your body ages only 1 year.

BEAST SPELLS
Beginning at 18th leveI, you can cast many of your druid
spells in any shape you assume using Wild Shape. Vou
can perform the somatic and verbal components of a
druid spell while in a beast shape, but you aren't able to
provide material components.

ARCHDRUID
At 20th levei, you can use your Wild Shape an unlimited
number of times.

Additionally, you can ignore the verbal and somatic
components of your druid spells, as well as any material
components that lack a cost and aren't consumed bya
spell. Vou gain this benefit in both your normal shape
and your beast shape from Wild Shape,

DRUID

CIRCLES

Though their organization is invisible to most outsiders,
druids are part of a society that spans the land, ignoring
political borders, Ali druids are nominally members
of this druidic society, though some individuais are so
isolaled lhat lhey have never seen any high-ranking
members of the society or participated in druidic
gatherings. Druids recognize each other as brothers and
sislers, Like creatures of the wilderness, however, druids
somelimes compete with or even prey on each other,
At a local scale, druids are organized into circles that
share certain perspectives on nature, balance, and the
way of the druid,

CIRCLE

OF THE LAND

The Circle of the Land is made up of mystics and sages
who safeguard ancient knowledge and rites through
a vast oral tradition, These druids meet within sacred
circles of trees or standing slones to whisper primai
secrets in Druidic, The circle's wisest members preside
as the chief priests of communities lhat hold to the Old
Faith and serve as advisors to the rulers of those folk,
As a member of this circle, your magic is inl1uenced
by the land where you were initiated into the circle's
mysterious rites.

ARCTIC

Druid Levei

hold person, spike growth
sleet storm, slow

7th
9th

freedom of movement, ice storm
com mune with nature, cone of cold

COAST

Druid Levei

CANTRIP

When you choose this circle aI 2nd leveI, you learn one
additional druid cantrip of your choice.
NATURAL

RECOVERY

Starling at 2nd levei, you can regain some of your
magical energy by sitting in meditation and communing
with nature, During a short rest, you choose expended
spell slots to recover. The spell slols can have a
combined levei that is equal to or less lhan half your
druid levei (rounded up), and none of the slots can be
6th levei or higher. Vou can't use this feature again until
you finish a long rest
For example, when YOllare a 4th-levei druid, YOllcan
recover up to two leveis worth of spell slots, Vou can
recover either a 2nd-levei slot or two 1sI-leveI slots,
CIRCLE

SPELLS

Vour mystical connection to the land infllses you with
lhe ability lo cast certa in spells, At 3rd, 5th, 7th, and
9th levei you gain access to circle spells connecled
to the land where YOllbecame a drllid, Choose that
land-arctic, coast, desert, forest, grassland. mountain,
swamp, or Underdark-and
consult the associated
list of spells,
Once YOllgain access lo a circle spell. YOllalways have
il prepared, and it doesn't count against the nllmber of
spells you can prepare each day.lfyoll gain access to a
spell that doesn't appear on the drllid spelllist, the spell
is nonetheless a drllid spell for YOll,

68

PART 1 I CLASSES

Circle Spells

3rd

mirror image, misty step

5th
7th

water breathing, water walk
control water,freedom
of movement

9th

conjure elemental,

scrying

DESERT

Druid Levei

Circle Spells

3rd
5th
7th

blur, silence
create food and water, protection from energy
blight, haf/ucinatory terrain

9th

insect plague, waf/ of stone

FOREST

Druid Levei

Circle Spells

3rd
5th
7th

barkskin, spider c/imb
caf/lightning, plant growth
divination,freedom
of movement

9th

com mune with nature, tree stride

GRASSLAND

Druid Levei
BONUS

Circle Spells

3rd
5th

Circle Spells

3rd

invisibility, pass without trace

5th
7th
9th

daylight, haste
divination,freedom
of movement
dream, insect plague

MOUNTAIN

Druid Levei
3rd
5th
7th
9th

Circle Spells
spider c/imb, spike growth
lightning bolt, meld into stone
stone shape, stoneskin
passwall, waf/ of stone

SWAMP

Druid Levei

Circle Spells

3rd

darkness, Melf's acid arrow

5th
7th

water walk, stinking c/oud
freedom of movement, loca te creature

9th

insect plague, scrying

UNDERDARK

Druid Levei
3rd
5th
7th
9th

Circle Spells
spider climb, web
gaseous form, stinking c/oud
greater invisibility, stone shape
c/oudkif/, insect plague

LAND'S STRIDE

PRIMAL STRIKE

Starting at 6th levei, moving through nonmagical
difficult terrain costs you no extra movement. Vou can
also pass through nonmagical plants without being
slowed by them and without taking damage from them if
they have thorns, spines, or a similar hazard.
In addition, you have advantage on saving throws against
plants that are magically created or manipulated to impede
movement, such those created by the entangle spell.

Starting at 6th levei, your attacks in beast form eount as
magical for the purpose of overcoming resistance and
immunity to nonmagieal attaeks and damage.

At 10th levei, you can expend two uses of Wild Shape
at the same time to transform into an air elemental, an
earth elemental, a fire elemental, or a water elemental.

ELEMENTAL WILD SHAPE

NATURE'S WARD

THOUSAND

When you reach 10th levei, you can't be charmed or
frightened by elementals or fey, and you are immune to
poison and disease.

By 14th levei, you have learned to use magie to alter
your physical form in more subtle ways. Vou can cast the
alter self spell at will.

NATURE'S

••

SANCTUARY

When you reach 14th levei, creatures of the natural
world sense your connection to nature and become
hesitant to attack you. When a beast or plant creature
attacks you, that creature must make a Wisdom saving
throw against your druid spell save DC. On a failed save,
the creature must choose a different target, or the attack
automatically misses. On a successful save, the creature
is immune to this effect for 24 hours.
The creature is aware of this effect before it makes its
attack against you.

CIRCLE OF THE MOON
Druids of the Circle of the Moon are fierce guardians
of the wilds. Their order gathers under the full moon to
share news and trade warnings. They haunt thc deepest
parts of the wilderness, where they might go for weeks
on end before crossing paths with another humanoid
creature, let alone another druid.
Changeable as the moon, a druid of this circle might
prowl as a great cat one night, soar over the treetops
as an eagle the next day, and crash through the
undergrowth in bear form to drive off a trespassing
monster. The wild is in the druid's blood.
COMBAT WILD SHAPE

When you choose this circle at 2nd levei, you gain the
ability to use Wild Shape on your turn as a bonus action,
rather than as an action.
Additionally, while you are transformed by Wild
Shape. you can use a bonus action to expend one
spell slot to regain ld8 hit points per levei of the spell
slot expended.

DRUIOS

FORMS

•••
ANO THE COOS

Some druids venerate the forces of nature themselves, but
most druids are devoted to one of the many nature deities
worshiped in the multiverse (the Iists of gods in appendix
B inelude many such deities). The worship ofthese deities
is often considered a more ancient tradition than the faiths
of elerics and urbanized peoples. In fact, in the world of
Greyhawk, the druidic faith is called the Old Faith, and it
elaims many adherents among farmers, foresters, fishers,
and others who live elosely with nature. This tradition
ineludes the worship of Nature as a primai force beyond
personification, but also encompasses the worship of Beory,
the Oerth Mother, as well as devotees ofObad.Hai, Ehlonna,
and Ulaa.
In the worlds of Greyhawk and the Forgotten Realms,
druidic cireles are not usually connected to the faith of a
single nature deity. Any given cirele in the Forgotten Realms,
for example, might inelude druids who revere Silvanus,
Mielikki, Eldath, Chauntea, or even the harsh Gods of Fury:
Talos, Malar, Auril, and Umberlee. These nature gods are
often called the First Cirele, the first among the druids, and
most druids count them ali (even the violent ones) as worthy
af veneration.

The druids of Eberron hold animistic beliefs completely
unconnected to the Sovereign Host, the Dark Six, or any of
the other religions of the world. They believe that every living
thing and every natural phenomenon-sun,
moon, wind,
fire, and the world itself-has
a spiri!. Their spells, then, are
a means to communicate with and command these spirits.
Different druidic sects, though, hold different philosophies
about the pro per relationship of these spirits to each other
and to the forces of civilization. The Ashbound, for example,
believe that arcane magic is an abomination against nature,

the Children ofWinter venerate the forces of death, and the
Gatekeepers preserve ancient traditions meant to protect the
world from the incursion of aberrations.

CIRCLE FORMS

The rites ofyour circle grant you the ability to transform
into more dangerous animal forms. Starting at 2nd
levei, you can use your Wild Shape to transform into a
beast with a challenge rating as high as 1 (you ignore
the Max. CR eolumn of the Beast Shapes table, but must
abide by the other limitations there).
Starting at 6th levei, you can transform into a beast
with a challenge rating as high as your druid leveI
divided by 3, rounded down.

CLASSES

h9

FIGHTER
A human in clanging plate armor holds her shield
before her as she runs toward the massed goblins. An
elf behind her, clad in studded leather armor, peppers
the goblins with arrows loosed from his exquisitc
bow. The half-orc nearby shouls orders, helping
lhe lwo combalanls coordinate their assault to the
best advantage.
A dwarf in chain mail interposes his shield between
the ogre's club and his companion, knocking the dcadly
blow aside. His companion, a half-elf in scale armor,
swings two scimitars in a blinding whirl as she circles
the ogre, looking for a blind spot in its defenses.
A gladiator fighls for sport in an arena, a master with
his trident and net, skilled at toppling foes and moving
them around for the crowd's delight-and his own
tactical advantage. His opponent's sword fiares with
blue light an instant beforc she sends lightning fiashing
forth to smite him.
Ali of these heroes are fighlers, perhaps the most
diverse class of characters in the worlds of DUNGEONS &
DRAGONS. Questing knighls, conquering overlords, royal
champions, elite foot soldiers, hardened mercenaries,
and bandit kings-as fighters, they ali share an
unparalleled mastery with weapons and armor, and a
thorough knowledge of the skills of combat. And they
are well acquainted with death, both meting it out and
staring it defiantly in lhe face.
WELL-RoUNDED

SPECIALISTS

Fighters learn the basics of ali combat styles. Every
fighter can swing an axe, fence wilh a rapier, wield a
longsword or a grealsword, use a bow, and even trap foes
in a net with some degree of skill. Likewise, a fighler is
adept with shields and every form of armor. Beyond that
basic degree of familiarity, each fighler specializes in a
cerlain style of combat. Some concentrate on archery,
some on fighting with two weapons aI once, and some
on augmenting their martial skills with magic. This
combination of broad general ability and extensive
specialization makes fighters superior combatants
on battlefields and in dungeons alike.
TRAINED

•

FOR DANGER

Nol every member of the cily walch, lhe village mililia,
or the queen's army is a fighter. Mosl of these lroops are
relatively untrained soldiers wilh only lhe mosl basic
combat knowledge. Veleran soldiers, mililary officers,
lrained bodyguards, dedicated knighls, and similar
figures are fighlers.

70

PART 1 I CLASSES

THE FICHTER

Levei

Proficiency
Bonus

1 st

+2

Fighting Style, Second Wind

2nd

+2

3rd
4th

+2

Action Surge (one use)
Martial Arehetype
Ability Seore Improvement
Extra Attaek

+2

5th

+3

6th
7th

+3

Features

+3

Ability Score Improvement
Martial Archetype feature

8th

+3

Ability Seore Improvement

9th

+4

10th

+4

11th

+4

12th

+4

Indomitable (one use)
Martial Arehetype feature
Extra Attaek (2)
Ability Seore Improvement

13th
14th

+5
+5

Indomitable
(two uses)
Ability Seore Improvement

15th

+5

16th

+5

Martial Arehetype feature
Ability Seore Improvement

17th

+6

Aetion Surge (two uses). Indomitable

18th

+6

19th

+6

20th

+6

(three uses)
Martial Arehetype feature
Ability Seore Improvement
Extra Attaek (3)

Some fighters feel drawn to use their training as
adventurers. The dungeon delving, monster slaying, and
other dangerous work common among adventurers is
second nature for a fighter, not ali that different from
the life he ar she left behind. There are greater risks,
perhaps, but also much greater rewards-few fighters in
the city watch have the opportunity to discover a magic
flame tongue sword, for example.

CREATING A FIGHTER
As you build your fighter, think about two related
elements ofyour character's background: Where did
you get your combat training, and what set you apar!
from the mundane warriors around you? Were you
particularly ruthless? Did you get extra help from a
mentor, perhaps because of your exceptional dedication?
What drove you to this training in the first place? A
threat to your homeland, a thirsl for revenge, ar a need
to prove yourself might ali have been factors.
Vou might have enjoyed formal training in a noble's
army ar in a local militia. Perhaps you trained in a war
academy, learning strategy, tactics, and military history.
Or you mighl be self-taught-unpolished
but well tested.
Did you take up the sword as a way to escape the limits
of life on a farm, ar are you following a proud family
tradition? Where did you acquire your weapons and
armar? They might have been military issue ar family
heirlooms. ar perhaps you scrimped and saved for years

to buy them. Your armaments are now among your
most important possessions-the
only things that stand
between you and death's embrace.
QUICK BUILD

Vou can make a fighter quickly by following these
suggestions. first, make Strength ar Dexterity your
highest ability score, depending on whether you
want to focus on melee weapons ar on archery (ar
finesse weapons). Your next-highest score should be
Constitution, ar Intelligence if you plan to adopt the
Eldritch Knight martial archetype. Second, choose
the soldier background.

CLASS FEATURES
As a fighter, you gain the following class features.
HIT POINTS

Ui! Dice: IdlO per fighter levei
Ui! Points at 1st Levei: 10 + your Constitution modifier
Uit Points at Uigher LeveIs: IdlO (ar 6) + your
Constitution modifier per fighter levei after 1st
PROFICIENCIES

Armar: Ali armar, shields
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: Nane
Saving Throws: Strength, Constitution

PART 1 I CL~SSES

71

Skills: Choose two skills from Acrobatics, Animal
Handling, Athletics, History, [nsight, [ntimidation,
Perception, and Survival

Once you use this feature, you must finish a short or
long rest before you can use it again. Starting at 17th
levei, you can use it twice before a rest, but only once on
the same turno

EQUIPMENT

Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background:
(a) chain mail or (b) leather, longbow, and 20 arrows
(a) a martial weapon and a shield or (b) two martial

weapons
(a) a Iight crossbow and 20 bolts or (b) two handaxes
(a) a dungeoneer's pack or (b) an explorer's pack

FIGHTING

STYLE

Vou adopt a particular style of fighting as your specialty,
Choose one of the following options. Vou can't take a
Fighting Style option more than once, even if you later
get to choose again.

MARTIAL ARCHETYPE
At 3rd leveI, you choose an archetype that you strive to
emulate in your combat styles and techniques. Choose
Champion, Battle Master, or Eldritch Knight, ali detailed
at the end of the c1ass description. The archetype you
choose grants you features at 3rd leveI and again at 7th,
10th, 15th, and 18th leveI.

ABILITY

SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you reach 4th levei, and again at 6th, 8th, 12th,
14th, 16th, and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability
score of your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability
se ores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase
ao ability score above 20 using this feature.

ARCHERY

Vou gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls you make with
ranged weapons.
DEFENSE

While you are wearing armor, you gain a +1 bonus to AC.
DUELING

When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and
no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls
with that weapon,
GREAT

WEAPON

FIGHTING

When you roll a 1 or 2 on a damage die for an attack you
make with a melee weapon that you are wielding with
two hands, you can reroll the die and must use the new
roll, even if the new roll is a 1 or a 2. The weapoo must
have the two-handed or versatile property for you to gaio
this benefit.
PROTECTION

When a creature you can see attacks a target other
than you that is within 5 feet of YOtl,you can use your
reaction to impose disadvantage on the attack roll. Vou
must be wielding a shield.
TWO-WEAPON

FIGHTING

When you engage in two-weapon fighting, you can add
your ability modifier to the damage of lhe second attack.

SECOND WIND
Vou have a limited well of stamina that you can draw on
to protect YOtlrself from harm. On your turn, you can use
a bonus action to regain hit points equal to ld10 + your
fighter leveI.
Once you use this feature, you must finish a short or
long rest before you can use it again.

ACTION

SURGE

Starting at 2nd leveI, Yotlcan push yourself beyond yotlr
normallimits for a momento On your turn, you can take
one additional action on top of your regular action and a
possible bonus action.

72

PART 1 I CLASSES

EXTRA ATTACK
Beginning at 5th leveI, you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno
The number of attacks increases to three wheo you
reach 11th leveI in this c1ass and to four when you reach
20th leveI in this c1ass.

INDOMITABLE
Beginning at 9th leveI, you can reroll a saving throw that
you fail. If you do 50, Yotl must use the new roll, and you
can't use this feature again until you finish a long resto
Vou can use this feature twice between [ong rests
starting at 13th levei and three times between long rests
starting at 17th leveI.

MARTIAL ARCHETYPES
Different fighters choose different approaches to
perfectiog their fighting prowess. The martial archetype
you choose to emulate renects your approach.

CHAMPION
The archetypal Champion focuses on the development
of raw physical power honed to deadly perfection.
Those who model themselves on this archetype combine
rigorous traioing with physical excellence to deal
devastati ng blows.
IMPROVED

CRITICA

L

Beginning when you choose this archetype at 3rd
leveI, your weapon attacks score a criticaI hit on a
roll of 19 or 20.
REMARKABLE

ATHLETE

Starting at 7th level, you can add half yotlr proficiency
bonus (round up) to any Strength, Dexterity, or
Constitutioo check you make that doesn't already use
your proficiency bonus.
[n addition, when you makc a running longjump, the
distance you can cover increases by a number of feet
equal to yotlr Strength modifier.

ADDITIONAL

FIGHTING

STYLE

At 10th levei, you can choose a second option from the
Fighting Style class feature.
SUPERIOR

CRITICAL

Starting at 15th leveI, your weapon attacks score a
criticaI hit on a roll of 18-20.
SURVIVOR

At 18th levei, you attain the pinnacle of resilience in
battle. At the start of each of your turns, you regain hit
points equal to 5 + your Constitution modifier if you
have no more than half of your hit points left. Vou don't
gain this benefit if you have O hit points.

BATTLE MASTER
Those who emulate the archetypal Battle Master
employ martial techniques passed down through
generations. To a Battle Master, combat is an academic
field, sometimes including subjects beyond battle such
as weaponsmithing and calligraphy. Not every fighter
absorbs the lessons of history, theory, and artistry
that are reflected in the Battle Master archetype, but
those who do are well-rounded fighters of great skill
and knowledge.
COMBAT

SUPERIORITY

When you choose this archetype at 3rd leveI, you
learn maneuvers that are fueled by special dice called
superiority dice.
Maneuvers. Vou learn three maneuvers of your
choice, which are detailed under "Maneuvers" below.
Many maneuvers enhance an atlack in some way. Vou
can use only one maneuver per attack.
Vou learn two additional maneuvers ofyour choice
at 7th, 10th, and 15th leveI. Each time you learn new
maneuvers, you can also replace one maneuver you
know with a different one.
Superiority Diee. Vou have four superiority dice,
which are d8s. A superiority die is expended when you
use it. Vou regain ali of your expended superiority dice
when you finish a short or long rest.
Vou gain another superiority die at 7th leveI and one
more aI 15th leveI.
Saving Throws. Some of your maneuvers require
your target lO make a saving throw to resist the
maneuver's effects. The saving throw DC is calculated
as follows:
Maneuver save De ~ 8 + your profieieney
your 5trength
STUDENT

or Dexterity modifier

bonus +

(your ehoiee)

OF WAR

At 3rd leveI, you gain proficiency with one type of
artisan's tools of your choice.
KNOW

YOUR

ENEMY

Starting at 7th levei, if you spend at least 1 minute
observing or interacting with another creature outside
combat, you can learn certain information about its
capabilities compared to your own. The DM tells you if
lhe creature is your equal, superior, or inferior in regard
to two of the following characteristics ofyour choice:
PA TI

(l

'\SSES

"3

Strength score
Dexterity score
Constitution score
Armor Class
Current hit points
Total class leveIs (if any)
Fighter class leveIs (if any)
IMPROVED COMBAT SUPERIORITY

At 10th levei, your superiority dice turn into dlOs, At
18th levei, they turn into d 12s,
RELENTLESS

Starting at 15th levei, when you roll initiative and
have no superiority dice remaining, you regain 1
superiority die,
MANEUVERS

The maneuvers are presented in alphabetical order,
Commander's Stríke. When you take the Attack
action on your turn, you can forgo one of your attacks
and use a bonus action to direct one of your companions
to strike, When you do so, choose a friendly creature
who can see or hear you and expend one superiority die,
That creature can immediately use its reaction to make
one weapon attack, adding the superiority die to the
attack's damage rol\.
Dísarmíng Attack. When you hit a creature with a
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to
attempt to disarm the target, forcing it to drop one item
of your choice that it's holding, Vou add the superiority
die to the attack's damage roll, and the target must
make a Strength saving throw, On a failed save, it drops
the object you choose, The object lands at its fee!.
Dístractíng Strike. When you hit a creature with a
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to
distract the creature, giving your allies an opening, Vou
add the superiority die to the attack's damage rol\. The
next attack roll against the target by an attacker other
than you has advantage if the attack is made before the
start of your next turn,
Evasíve Footwork. When you move, you can expend
one superiority die, rolling the die and adding the
number rolled to your AC until you stop moving,
Feíntíng Attack. Vou can expend one superiority die
and use a bonus action on your turn to feint, choosing
one creature within 5 feet of you as your targe!. Vou
have advantage on your next attack roll against that
creature, If that attack hits, add the superiority die to the
attack's damage rol\.
Goadíng Attack. When you hit a creature with a
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to
attempt to goad the target into attacking you, Vou add
the superiority die to the attack's damage roll, and
the target must make a Wisdom saving throw, On a
failed save, the target has disadvantage on ali attack
rolls against targets other than you until the end of
your next turn,
Lungíng Attack. When you make a melee weapon
attack on your turn, you can expend one superiority die
to increase your reach for that attack by 5 feet. ]f you hit,
you add the superiority die to the attack's damage rol\.

74

PART 1 I CLASSES

Maneuveríng Attack. When you hit a creature with
a weapon attack, you can expend one superiority
die to maneuver one of your comrades into a more
advantageous position, Vou add the superiority die to the
attack's damage roll, and you choose a friendly creature
who can see or hear you, That creature can use its
reaction to move up to half its speed without provoking
opportunity attacks from the target of your attack.
MenaCÍngAttack. When you hit a creature with a
weapon attack, you can expend one superiority die to
attempt to frighten the target. Vou add the superiority
die to the attack's damage roll, and the target must
make a Wisdom saving throw, On a failed save, it is
frightened of you until the end of your next turn,
Parry. When another creature damages you with a
mele e attack, you can use your reaction and expend one
superiority die to reduce the damage by the number you
roll on your superiority die + your Dexterity modifier,
PreCÍsíon Attack. When you make a weapon attack
roll against a creature, you can expend one superiority
die to add it to the rol\. Vou can use this maneuver
before or after making the attack roll, but before any
effects of the attack are applied,
Pushíng Attack. When you hit a creature with
a weapon attack, you can expend one superiority
die to attempt to drive the target back. Vou add the
superiority die to the attack's damage roll, and if the
target is Large or smaller, it must make a Strength
saving throw, On a failed save, you push the target up
to 15 feet away from you,
Rally. On your turn, you can use a bonus action and
expend one superiority die to bolster the resolve of one
of your companions. When you do so, choose a friendly
creature who can see or hear you, That creature gains
temporary hit points equal to the superiority die roll +
your Charisma modifier,
Ríposte. When a creature misses you with a melee
attack, you can use your reaction and expend one
superiority die to make a melee weapon attack against
the creature, ]f you hit, you add the superiority die to the
attack's damage rol\.
Sweepíng Attack. When you hit a creature with a
melee weapon attack, you can expend one superiority
die to attempt to damage another creature with the
same attack, Choose another creature within 5 feet
of the original target and within your reach, If the
original attack roll would hit the second creature, it
takes damage equal to the number you roll on your
superiority die, The damage is of the same type dealt by
the original attack,
TrípAttack. When you hit a creature with a weapon
attack, you can expend one superiority die to attempt
to knock the target down, Vou add the superiority die
to the attack's damage roll, and if the target is Large or
smaller, it must make a Strength saving throw, On a
failed save, you knock the target prone,

ELDRITCH

KNIGHT

The archetypal Eldritch Knight combines the martial
mastery common to ali fighters with a careful study of
magic. Eldritch Knights use magical techniques similar
to those practiced by wizards, They focus their study

on two of the eight schools of magic: abjuration and
evocation. Abjuration spells grant an Eldritch Knight
additional protection in battle, and evocation spells deal
damage to many foes at once, extending the fighter's
reach in combat. These knights learn a comparatively
small number of spells, committing them to memory
instead of keeping them in a spellbook.
SPELLCASTING

When you reach 3rd levei, you augment your martial
prowess with the ability to cast spells. See chapter 10
for the general rules of spellcasting and chapter 11 for
the wizard spelllist.
Cantrips. Vou learn two cantrips of your choice fram
the wizard spell list. Vou learn an additional wizard
cantrip of your choice at 10th leveI.
SpeJl Slots. The Eldritch Knight Spellcasting table
shows how many spell slots you have to cast your
spells of 1st leveI and higher. To cast one of these
spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's levei or
higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you
finish a long rest.
For example, if you know the Ist.level spell shieId and
have a Ist.level and a 2nd.level spell slot available, you
can cast shieId using either slot.
SpeJls Known of 1st-LeveI and Higher. Vou know
three 1st.level wizard spells of your choice, two of which
you must choose from the abjuration and evocation
spells on the wizard spelllist.
The Spells Known column of the Eldritch Knight
Spellcasting table shows when you learn more wizard
spells of 1st levei or higher. Each of these spells must be
an abjuration or evocation spell of your choice, and must
be of a leveI for which you have spell slots. For instance,
when you reach 7th levei in this c1ass, you can learn one
new spell of 1st or 2nd leveI.
The spells you learn at 8th, 14th, and 20th leveI can
come from any school of magic.
Whenever you gain a leveI in this c1ass, you can
replace one of the wizard spells you know with another
spell of your choice from lhe wizard spelllist. The
new spell must be of a leveI for which you have spell
slots, and it must be an abjuration or evocation spell,
unless you're replacing the spell you gained at 8th, 14th,
or 20th leveI.
Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting
ability for your wizard spells, since you learn your
spells through study and memorization. Vou use your
lntelligence whenever a spell refers to your spellcasting
ability. In addition, you use your Intelligence modifier
when setting lhe saving throw De for a wizard spell you
cast and when making an attack roll with one.
Spell save DC ~ 8 + your proficiency
your Intelligence
Spell attack

modifier

= your proficiency

your Intelligence

bonus

+

modifier

ELDRITCH

KNIGHT

FIghter
Levei

Cantrips
Known

SPELLCASTlNG

Spells
Known

-Spell

Slots per Spell Level-

1st

2nd

3rd

2

3

2

4th

2

4

3
3

5th

2

4

6th

2

4

3

7th

2

5

4

2

8th

2

6

4

2

9th

2

6

4

2

10th

3

7

4

3

3rd

11th

3

8

4

3

12th

3

8

4

3

13th

3

9

4

3

2

14th

3

10

4

3

2

15th

3

10

4

3

2

16th

3

11

4

3

3

17th

3

11

4

3

3

18th

3

11

4

3

3

19th

3

12

4

3

3

20th

3

13

4

3

3

4th

during a short rest. The weapon must be within your
reach throughout the ritual, at the conc1usion of which
you touch the weapon and forge the bond.
ance you have bonded a weapon to yourself, you
can't be disarmed of that weapon unless you are
incapacitated. lf It is on the same plane of existence,
you can summon that weapon as a bonus action on your
turn, causing it to teleport instantiy to your hand.
Vou can have up to two bonded weapons, but can
summon only one at a time with your bonus action.
1fyou attempt to bond with a third weapon, you must
break the bond with one of the other two.
WAR MAGIC

Beginning at 7th levei, when you use your action to
cast a cantrip, you can make one weapon attack as a
bonus actiou.
ELDRITCH

STRIKE

At 10th levei, you learn how to make your weapon
strikes undercut a creature's resistance to your spells.
When you hit a creature with a weapon attack, that
creature has disadvantage on the next saving throw
it makes against a spell you cast before the end of
your next turno
ARCANE CHARGE

At 15th levei, you gain the ability to teleport up to 30
feet to an unoccupied space you can see when you use
your Action Surge. Vou can teleport before or after the
additional actioll.

bonus +

modifier

WEAPON BOND

At 3rd levei, you learn a ritual that creates a magical
bond between yourself and one weapon. Vou perform
the ritual over the course of I hour, which can be done

IMPROVED WAR MAGIC

Starting at 18th levei, when you use your action to
cast a spell, you can make one weapon attack as a
bonus actiOIl.

PART I

C'l~SSES

J

Her fists a blur as lhey detlect an incoming hail of arrows,
a half-elf springs over a barrieade and lhrows herself
into lhe massed ranks of hobgoblins on lhe olher side.
She whirls among lhem. knocking lheir blows aside and
sending them reeling. unlil allasl she slands alone.
Taking a deep breath. a human eovered in tattoos
seltles inlo a battle stanee. As lhe tirsl eharging ores
reaeh him. he exhales and a blasl of tire roars from his
moulh, engulting his foes.
Moving wilh lhe silenee of lhe nighl, a blaek-c1ad
halfling sleps inlo a shadow benealh an areh and
emerges from anolher inky shadow on a balcony a
stone's lhrow away. She slides her blade free of ils c1othwrapped seabbard and peers lhrough lhe open window
aI lhe lyranl prinee. so vulnerable in lhe grip of sleep.
Whalever lheir discipline, monks are uniled in lheir
abilily lo magically harness lhe energy lhal tlows in
lheir bodies. Whelher ehanneled as a slriking display
of eombal prowess or a subI ler foeus of defensive abilily
and speed, lhis energy infuses alllhal a monk does.

THE MAGIC OF KI
Monks make eareful sludy of a magieal energy lhal mos I
monaslie lradilions eall ki. This energy is an elemenl
of lhe magie lhal suffuses lhe mulliverse-speeitieally,
lhe elemenl lhat flows lhrough Iiving bodies. Monks
harness this power wilhin lhemsclves lo ereate magieal
effeels and exeeed their bodies' physieal eapabililies.
and some of lheir special attaeks ean hinder lhe tlow of
ki in lheir opponenls. Using lhis energy. monks ehannel
uneanny speed and slrenglh inlo lheir unarmed slrikes.
As lhey gain experienee. lheir marlial lraining and lheir
maslery ofki gives them more power over lheir bodies
and lhe bodies of their foes.

TRAINING

AND ASCETICISM

Small walled c10islers doI the landseapes of lhe worlds
of 0&0. liny refuges from the tlow of ordinary Iife,
where time seems lo stand stil!. The monks who live
lhere seek personal perfeetion lhrough eonlemplation
and rigorous lraining. Many enlered lhe monastery
as ehildren. senl lo Iive lhere when lheir parents died,
when food eouldn't be found lo sllpport lhem, or in
return for some kindness that the monks had performed
for lheir families.
Some monks Iive entirely apart from the surrollnding
populalion. secluded from anyl hing lhat might impede
their spirilllal progresso Olhers are sworn lo isolalion,

PART I I CLASSES

Proficieney
Bonus

Marlial
Arls

1st

+2

ld4

2nd

+2

1d4

Ki
Points

Unarmored
Movement

Features
Unarmored

2

+10 ft.

Defense,

Ki, Unarmored

Martial Arts

Movement

3rd

+2

ld4

3

+10 fI.

Monastie

4th

+2

1d4

4

+10 fI.

Ability Seore Improvement,

Tradition,

Defleet

Missiles
Slow Fali

5th

+3

1d6

5

+10 ft.

Extra Attaek, Stunning

Strike

6th

+3

1d6

6

+15 ft.

Ki-Empowered

Monastie

7th

+3

ld6

7

+15 ft.

Evasion,

8th

+3

1d6

8

+15 ft.

Ability Seore Improvement

9th

+4

1d6

9

+15 ft.

Unarmored

10th

+4

ld6

10

+20 ft.

Purity of Body

Strikes,

Stillness

Movement

11th

+4

ld8

11

+20 fI.

Monastic

+4

ld8

12

+20 fI.

Ability Seore Improvement

13th

+5

ld8

13

+20 fI.

Tongue

14th

+5

ld8

14

+25 fI.

Diamond

Sou I

15th

+5

ld8

15

+25 fI.

Timeless

Body

feature

of the Sun and Moon

16th

+5

1d8

16

+25 fI.

Ability Seore Improvement

17th

+6

1d10

17

+25 fI.

Monastie

18th

+6

1d10

18

+30 fI.

Empty Body

19th

+6

ldlO

19

+30 ft.

Ability Score Improvement

20th

+6

ldl0

20

+30 ft.

Perfeel

emerging only lo serve as spies or assassins ai the
command of lheir leader, a noble palron, or some other
morlal or divine power.
The majorily of monks don'l shun Iheir neighbors,
making frequenl visilS lO nearhy lowns or villages and
exchanging Iheir servicc for food and other goods. As
versalile warriors, monks oflen end up prolecting their
neighbors fram monsters or Iyranls.
For a monk, bccoming an advenlllrer means leaving
a struelured, communallift'slyle lo beco me a wanderer.
This can be a harsh transition, and monks don't
undertake illightly. Those who leave their cloisters take
their work seriollsly, approaching Iheir adventures as
personal tesls of Iheir physical and spiritual growth.
As a rule, monks care lillle for material wealth and are
driven by a desire lo aceomplish a grealer mission than
merely slaying monsters and plundering Iheir treasure.

CREATING A MONK
As you make your monk characler, Ihink about your
connection lO lhe monaslery where you leamed your
skills and spenl your formal ive years. Were you an
orphan or a child left on lhe monaslery's threshold? Did
your parents promise YOlllo the monastery in gratitude
for a service performed by lhe lllonks? Did you enler
Ihis secluded life lo hide from a crime you committed?
Or did you choosc the monaslic life for yourself?
Consider why you lefl. Did lhe head of your monastery
choose you for a parliclllarly imporlant mission beyond
the cloisler? Perhaps you \Vere casl out because of
some violalion of lhe communily's rules. Did you dread
leaving, or were you happy lo go? ls Ihere somelhing
you hope lo accomplish oulside lhe monastery? Are you
eager lo relum to your home?

feature

improvement

12th

Tradition

Tradition

of Mind

Tradition

feature

Self

As a result of the structured life of a monastic
community and the discipline required lOhamess ki,
monks are almosl always lawful in alignmenl.
QUICK BUILD

Vou can make a monk quickly by following lhese
suggestions. First, make Dexlerily your highesl
ability score, followed by Wisdom. Second, choose the
hermit background.

CLASS FEATURES
As a monk, you gain the following class features.
HIT POINTS

Hil Dice: Id8 per monk levei
Hil Poinls aI Is1 Levei: 8 + your Conslilution modifier
Hil Points aI Higher LeveIs: Id8 (or 5) + your
Constitution modifier per monk levei afler IsI
PROFICIENCIES

Armor: None
Weapons: Simple weapons, shortswords
Tools: Choose one type of arlisan's lools or one
musical inslrumenl
Saving Throws: Strength, Dexterity
Skills: Choose two from Acrobatics, Athletics, History,
lnsight, Religion, and Stealth
EQUIPMENT

Vou start with lhe following equipment, in addilion lo
the equipment granled by your background:
(a) a shortsword or (b) any simple weapon
(a) a dungeoneer's pack or (b) an explorer's pack

10 darts
PART 1

CL"':)SES

77

UNARMORED

DEFENSE

FLURRY OF BLOWS

Beginning at 1st leveI, while you are wearing no armor
and not wielding a shield, your AC equals 10 + your
Dexterity modifier + your Wisdom modifier.

PATIENT DEFENSE

MARTIAL ARTS
At 1st leveI, your practice of martial arts gives you
mastery of combat styles that use unarmed strikes and
monk weapons, which are shortswords and any simple
melee weapons that don't have the two-handed or
heavy property.
You gain the folIowing benefits while you are unarmed
or wielding only monk weapons and you aren't wearing
armor or wielding a shield:
You can use Dexterity instead of Strength for the
attack and damage rolIs of your unarmed strikes and
monk weapons.
Vou can rolI a d4 in place of the normal damage
ofyour unarmed strike or monk weapon. This die
changes as you gain monk leveis, as shown in the
Martial Arts column of the Monk table.
When you use the Attack action with an unarmed
strikc or a monk weapon on your turno you can make
one unarmed strike as a bonus action. For example, if
you take the Attack action and attack with a quarterstaff, you can also make an unarmed strike as a bonus
action, assuming you haven't already taken a bonus
action this turn,
Certain monasteries use specialized forms ofthe
monk weapons. For example, you might use a cluh
that is two lengths ofwood connected bya short chain
(calIed a nunchaku) or a sickle with a shorter, straighter
blade (called a kama), Whatever name you use for a
monk weapon. you can use the game statistics provided
for the weapon in chapter 5.

KI
Starting at 2nd levei, your training alIows you to
harness the mystic energy of ki. Your access to this
energy is represented bya number of ki points. Your
monk levei determines the number of points you have,
as shown in the Ki Points column of the Monk table,
You can spend these points to fuel various ki features.
You start knowing three such features: Flurry of Blows,
Patient Defcnse, and Step of the Wind, You learn more
ki features as you gain leveis in this class,
When you spend a ki poinl. it is unavailable until
you finish a short or long rest, at the end of which you
draw alI of your expended ki back into yourself. Vou
must spend at least 30 minutes of the rest meditating to
rega in your ki points,
Some ofyour ki features require your target to make
a saving throw to resist the feature's effects. The saving
throw DC is calculated as folIows:
Ki save De = 8 + your proficiency
your Wisdom

PART I I CLASSES

Immediately after you take the Attack action on your
turn, you can spend I ki point to make two unarmed
strikes as a bonus action.

modifier

bonus +

Vou can spend I ki point to take the Dodge action as a
bonus action on your turno
STEP OF THE WIND

Vou can spend I ki point to take the Disengage or Dash
action as a bonus action on your turn, and your jump
distance is doubled for the turno

UNARMORED

MOVEMENT

Starting at 2nd levei, your speed increases by 10 feet
while you are not wearing armor or wielding a shield.
This bonus increases when you reach certain monk
leveis, as shown in the Monk table.
At 9th levei, you gain the ability to move along vertical
surfaces and across liquids on your turn without falIing
during the move,

MONASTIC

TRADITION

When you reach 3rd levei, you commit yourself to a
monastic tradition: the Way of the Open Hand, the Way
of Shadow, or the Way of the Four Elements, alI detailed
at the cnd of the class description. Your tradition
grants you features at 3rd levei and again at 6th, 11th,
and 17th leveI.

DEFLECT

MISSILES

Starting at 3rd leveI, you can use your reaction to
deflect or catch the missile when you are hit by a ranged
weapon attack. When you do so, the damage you take
from the attack is reduced by IdlO + your Dexterity
modifier + your monk leveI.
If you reduce the damage to O,you can catch the
missile if it is smalI enough for you to hold in one hand
and you have at least one hand free, If you catch a
missile in this way, you can spend I ki point to make a
ranged attack with the weapon or piece of ammunition
you just caught, as part of the same reaction. Vou make
this attack with proficiency, regardless of your weapon
proficiencies, and the missile counts as a monk weapon
for the attack.

ABILITY

SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI. you can increase one ability score of your
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature,

SLOW FALL
Beginning at 4th levei, you can use your reaction when
you falI to reduce any falIing damage you take by an
amount equal to five times your monk leveI.

EXTRA ATTACK
Beginning at 5th leveI, you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno

STUNNING STRIKE
Starting at 5th leveI, you can interfere with the flow of
ki in an opponent's body. When you hit another creature
with a melee weapon attack. you can spend 1 ki point to
attempt a stunning strike. The target must succeed on a
Constitution saving throw or be stunned until the end of
YOllrnext turno

KI-EMPOWERED

STRIKES

Starting at 6th leveI, your unarmed strikes count as
magical for the purpose of overcoming resistance and
immunity to nonmagical attacks and damage.

EVASION
At 7th leveI, YOllrinstinctive agility lets you dodge
out of the way of certain area effects, such as a blue
dragon's Iightning breath or a firebalJ spell. When YOll
are subjected to an effect that allows you to make a
Dextcrity saving throw to take only half damage, you
instead take no damage if you succeed on the saving
throw, and only half damage if you fail.

STILLNESS OF MIND
Starting at 7th leveI, you can use your action to end one
effect on yourself that is causing YOllto be charmed
or frightened.

PURITY OF BODY
At 10th leveI, your mastery of the ki flowing throllgh you
makes you immune to disease and poison.

TONGUE OF THE SUN AND MOON
Starting at 13th leveI, you learn to touch the ki of other
minds so that you understand ali spoken languages.
Moreover, any creature that can understand a langllage
can understand what you say.

DIAMOND SOUL

During that time, YOllalso have resistance to ali damage
but force damage.
Additionally, you can spend 8 ki points to cast the
astral projection spell, withollt needing material
components. When you do so. YOllcan't take any other
creatures with YOll.

PERFECT SELF
At 20th leveI, when you roll for initiative and have no ki
points remaining, you regain 4 ki points.

MONASTIC

TRADITIONS

Three traditions of monastic pllrsuit are common in
the monasteries scattered across the multiverse. Most
monasteries practice one tradition exclusively, bllt a
few honor the three traditions and instruct each monk
according to his or her aptitude and interest. Ali three
traditions rely on the same basic techniques. diverging
as the stlldent grows more adept. ThllS, a monk need
choose a tradition only upon reaching 3rd leveI.

WAY OF THE OPEN HAND
Monks of the Way of the Open Hand are the lIltimate
masters of martial arts combat, whether armed or
unarmed. They learn techniqlles to pllsh and trip their
opponents, manipulate ki to heal damage to their
bodies, and practice advanced meditation that can
protect them from harm.
OPEN HAND TECHNIQUE

Starting when you choose this tradition at 3rd leveI,
you can manipulate your enemy's ki when you harness
your own. Whenever you hit a creature with one of the
altacks granted by your Flurry of Blows, YOllcan impose
one of the following effects on that target:
It must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or be
knocked prone.
It must make a Strength saving throw. Ir it fails, you
can push it up to 15 feet away from YOll.
It can't take reactions until the end of your next turno
WHOLENESS

OF BODY

At 6th leveI, you gain the ability to heal YOllrself.As an
action, you can regain hit points equal to three times

Beginning at 14th leveI, your mastery of ki grants you
proficiency in ali saving throws.
Additionally, whenever YOllmake a saving throw and
fail, you can spend I ki point to reroll it and take the
second result.

TIMELESS BODY
At 15th leveI, your ki sustains you so that you suffer
none of the frailty of old age, and you can't be aged
magically. Vou can still die of old age, however. In
addition, you no longer need food or water.

EMPTY BODY
Beginning at 18th leveI. you can use YOllraction to
spend 4 ki points to become invisible for 1 minute.

PART 1

CLASSES

your monk leveI. Vou musl finish a long resl before you
can use lhis fealure again.
TRANQUILlTY

Beginning ai 111h levei. you can enler a special
medilalion lhal surrounds you wilh an aura of peace. AI
lhe end of a long resl. you gain lhe effecl of a sanctuary
spelllhal lasls unlillhe slarl of your nexllong resl (lhe
spell can end early as normal). The saving lhrow DC
for lhe spell equals 8 + your Wisdom modifier + your
proficieney bonus.
QUIVERING

PALM

AI 171hlevei. you gain lhe ability lo sei up lelhal
vibrations in someone's body. When you hil a crealure
with an unarmed slrike. you can spend 3 ki points to
slart these imperceplible vibralions. which lasl for a
number of days equallo your monk leveI. The vibralions
are harmless unless you use your action lo end lhem.
To do so. you and lhe largel musl be on lhe same plane
of exislence. When you use lhis aclion. lhe crealure
musl make a Conslilulion saving throw. If it fails. it is
reduced to O hil poinls. Ifil succeeds, illakes IOdlO
necrotic damage.
Vou can have only one creature under lhe effecl of lhis
fealure ai a lime. Vou can choose lo end the vibrations
harmlessly wilhout using an aclion.

WAY OF SHADOW
Monks of the Way of Shadow follow a lradilion lhal
values sleallh and sublerfuge. These monks might
be called ninjas or shadowdancers. and they serve as
spies and assassins. Somelimes the members of a
ninja monaslery are family members, forming a clan
sworn to secrecy about their arts and missions. Olher
monasleries are more like lhieves' guilds, hiring oul
their services lo nobles, rich merchanls, or anyone else
who can pay lheir fees. Regardless of their melhods, lhe
heads of lhese monasleries expect lhe unqueslioning
obedience of lheir sludenls.
SHADOW ARTS

Slarling when you choose this tradition ai 3rd levei. you
can use your ki lo duplicate lhe effecls of certain spells.
As an action. you can spend 2 ki poinls lo casl darkness,
darkvision. pass without trace, or si/ence. wilhoul
providing malerial components. Addilionally. you gain
lhe minor iJlusion canlrip if you don'l already know it.
SHADOW STEP

AI 61h levei. you gain lhe abilily lo slep from one shadow
into anolher. When you are in dim Iighl or darkness.
as a bonus aclion you can leleporl up to 60 feel to an
unoccupied space you can see that is also in dim lighl
or darkness. Vou lhen have advanlage on lhe firsl melee
altack you make before the end of the lurn.
CLOAK OF SHADOWS

By 111h leveI, you have learned lo beco me one wilh
lhe shadows. When you are in an area of dim lighl or
darkness, you can use your aclion lo become invisible.
Vou remain invisible until you make an altack. casl a
spell. or are in an area of brighl light.

80

PART

I I CLASSES

OPPORTUNIST

AI 171hleveI. you can exploil a crealure's momenlary
dislraclion when il is hil by an altack. Whenever a
creature wilhin 5 feel of you is hit by an allack made by
a crealure olher lhan you, you can use your reaclion to
make a melee atlack against lhal creature.

WAY OF THE FOUR ELEMENTS
Vou follow a monastic lradilion that teaches you to
harness lhe elemenls. When you focus your ki, you can
align yourself with lhe forces of creation and bend lhe
four elements lo your will, using lhem as an exlension
ofyour body, Some members oflhis lradition dedicale
lhemselves to a single elemenl, but others weave lhe
elements logelher.
Many monks of lhis lradition lalloo lheir bodies wilh
represenlalions of lheir ki powers. commonly imagined
as coiling dragons. bul also as phoenixes, fish. planls,
mounlains. and cresling waves.
DISCIPLE OF THE ELEMENTS

When you choose lhis lradilion ai 3rd levei, you learn
magical disciplines lhal harness lhe power of lhe four
elemenls. A discipline requires you lo spend ki points
each time you use it.
Vou know lhe Elemenlal Allunemenl discipline and
one olher elemenlal discipline of your choice, which are
delailed in lhe "Elemental Disciplines" seclion below.
Vou learn one addilional elemental discipline of your
choice ai 61h, 111h. and 17th leveI.
Whenever you learn a new elemenlal discipline,
you can also replace one elemenlal discipline lhal you
already know wilh a different discipline.
Casting Elemental Spells. Some elemenlal
disciplines allow you to casl spells. See chapter 10 for
lhe general rules of spellcasling. To cast one of lhese
spells, you use ils casting time and olher rules. but you
don'l need lo provide malerial componenls for it.
Once you reach 51h levei in lhis class. you can spend
additional ki poinls lo increase the levei of an elemenlal
discipline spelllhal you cas!, provided lhallhe spell has
an enhanced effecl at a higher levei. as burning hands
does. The spell's leveI increases by 1 for each addilional
ki poinl you spend. For example, if you are a 5th-levei
monk and use Sweeping Cinder Slrike lo casl burning
hands, you can spend 3 ki poinls lo casl it as a 2nd-levei
spell (lhe discipline's base cosi of 2 ki poinls plus I).
The maximum number of ki poinls you can spend lo
casl a spell in lhis Way (including ils base ki point cosi
and any addilional ki poinls you spend lOincrease its
levei) is delermined by your monk levei. as shown in lhe
Spells and Ki Poinls table.
$PELLS ANO KI POINTS

Monk Leveis

Maximum Ki Points for a Spell

5th-8th

3

9th-12th
13th-16th
17th-201h

4

5
6

ELEMENTAL

DISCIPLINES

The elemental disciplines are presented in alphabetical
arder. ]f a discipline requires a leveI, you must be that
leveI in this class to learn the discipline.
Breath ofWinter (17th LeveI Required). Vou can
spend 6 ki points to cast cone of cold.
Clench ofthe North Wind (6th LeveI Required). Vou
can spend 3 ki points to cast hold person.
Elemental Attunement. Vou can use your action to
brie!ly control elemental forces nearby, causing one of
the fol!owing effects of your choice:
Create a harmless, instantaneous sensory effect
related to air, earth, fire, or water, such as a shower of
sparks, a puff of wind, a spray of light mist, or a gentle
rumbling of stone.
Instantaneously light ar snuff out a candIe, a torch, ar
a smal! campfire.
Chill or warm up to I pound of nonliving material for
up to I hour.
Cause earth, fire, water, or mist that can fit within a
I-foot cube to shape itself into a crude form you designate for I minute.
Eternal Mountain Defense (11th LeveI Required).
Vou can spend 5 ki points to cast stoneskin,
targeting yourself.
Fangs ofthe Fire Snake. When you use the Atlack
action on your turn, you can spend I ki point to cause
tendrils of !lame to stretch out from your fists and feel.
Your reach with your unarmed strikes increases by
10 feet for that action, as wel! as the rest of the turn.
A hit with such an attack deals fire damage instead of
bludgeoning damage, and if you spend I ki point when
the attack hits, it also deals an extra IdlO fire damage.
Fist ofFour Thunders. Vou can spend 2 ki points to
cast thunderwave.
Fist ofUnbroken Air. Vou can create a blast of
compressed air that strikes like a mighty fisl. As an
action, you can spend 2 ki points and choose a creature
within 30 feet of YOU. That creature must make a
Strength saving throw. On a failed save, the creature
takes 3dl0 bludgeoning damage, plus an extra IdlO
bludgeoning damage for each additional ki point you
spend, and you can push the creature up to 20 feet away
from you and knock it prone. On a successful save, the
creature takes half as much damage, and you don't push
it or knock it prone.
Flames ofthe Phoenix (11th LeveI Required). Vou
can spend 4 ki points to cast fireball.
Gong ofthe Summit (6th LeveI Required). Vou can
spend 3 ki points to cast shatter.
Mist Stance (11th LeveI Required). Vou can spend 4
ki points to cast gaseous form, targeting yourself.
Ride the Wind (11th LeveI Required). Vou can spend
4 ki points to cast fiy, targeting yourself.
RiverofHungry Flame (17th LeveI Required). Vou
can spend 5 ki points to cast wall of fire.
Rush ofthe Gale Spirits. Vou can spend 2 ki points
to cast gust of wind.

Shape the Flowing River. As an action, you can
spend I ki point to choose an area of ice or water no
larger than 30 feet on a side within 120 feet of YOU. Vou
can change water to ice within the area and vice versa,
and you can reshape ice in the area in any manner you
choose. Vou can raise or lower the ice's elevation, create
ar fil! in a trench, erect or !latten a wal!, or form a pil!ar.
The extent of any such changes can't exceed half the
area's largest dimensiono For example, if you affect a
30-foot square, you can create a pillar up to 15 feet high,
raise or lower the square's elevation by up to 15 feet, dig
a trench up to 15 feet deep, and so on. Vou can't shape
the ice to trap or injure a creature in the area.
Sweeping Cinder Strike. Vou can spend 2 ki points to
cast burning hands.
Water Whip. Vou can spend 2 ki points as a bonus
action to create a whip of water that shoves and pul!s
a creature to unbalance lI. A creature that you can see
that is within 30 feet of you must make a Dexterity
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 3d 10
bludgeoning damage, plus an extra IdlO bludgeoning
damage for each additional ki point you spend, and you
can either knock it prone or pul! it up to 25 feet closer
to YOU. On a successful save, the creature takes half as
much damage, and you don't pul! It or knock it prone.
Wave ofRolling Earth (17th LeveI Required). Vou
can spend 6 ki points to cast wall of stone.

••

MONASTIC

••

ORDERS

lhe worlds of D&D contain a multitude of monasteries
and monastic traditions. In lands with an Asian cultural
flavor, such as Shou Lung far to the east of the Forgotten
Realms, these monasteries are associated with philosophical
traditions and martial arts practice. lhe Iron Hand School,
the Five Stars School, the Northern Fist School, and
the Southern Star School ofShou Lung teach different
approaches to the physical, mental, and spiritual disciplines
of the monk. Some of these monasteries have spread to the
western lands of FaerOn, particularly in places with large
Shou immigrant communities. such as lhesk and Westgate.
Other monastic traditions are associated with deities who
teach the value of physical excellence and mental discipline.
In the Forgotten Realms, the order ofthe Dark Moon is
made up of monks dedicated to Shar (goddess of loss), who
maintain secret communities in remote hills, back allies,
and subterranean hideaways. Monasteries of IImater (god
of endurance) are named after flowers, and their orders
carry the names of great heroes of the faith; the Disciples of
Saint Sollars the lwice-Martyred reside in the Monastery of
the Yellow Rose near Damara. lhe monasteries of Eberron
combine the study of martial arts with a life of scholarship.
Most are devoted to the deities of the Sovereign Hosl.
In the world of Dragonlance, most monks are devoted to
Majere, god of meditation and thoughl. In Greyhawk, many
monasteries are dedicated to Xan Yae, the goddess of twilight
and the superiority of mind over matter, or to Zuoken, god of
mental and physical mastery.
lhe evil monks ofthe Scarlet Brotherhood in the world of
Greyhawk derive their fanatic zeal not from devotion to a god
but from dedication to the principies oftheir nation and their
race-the belief that the Suei strand of humanity are meant
to rule the world .

..••....--------------------

..-

PART 1 I CLASSES

81

PALADIN
Clad in plate armor that gleams in the sunlight despite
the dust and grime of long travei, a human lays down
her sword and shield and places her hands on a mortally
wounded mano Divine radiance shines from her hands,
the man's wounds knit closed, and his eyes open wide
with amazement.
A dwarf crouches behind an outcrop, his black cloak
making him nearly invisible in the night, and watches
an orc war band celebrating its recent victory. Silently,
he stalks into their midst and whispers an oath, and two
orcs are dead before they even realize he is there.
Silver hair shining in a shaft of !ight that seems to
illuminate only him, an elf laughs with exultation. His
spear flashes like his eyes as he jabs again and again
at a twisted giant, until at last his light overcomes its
hideous darkness.
Whatever their origin and their mission, paladins are
united by their oaths to stand against the forces of evil.
Whether sworn before a god's altar and the witness of
a priest, in a sacred glade before nature spirits and fey
beings, or in a moment of desperation and grief with the
dead as the only witness, a paladin's oath is a powerful
bond. lt is a source of power that turns a devout warrior
into a blessed champion.

THE CAUSE OF RIGHTEOUSNESS
A paladin swears to uphold justice and righteousness,
to stand with the good things of the world against the
encroaching darkness, and to hunt the forces of evil
wherever they lurk. Different paladins focus on various
aspects of the cause of righteousness, but all are
bound by the oaths that grant them power to do their
sacred work. Although many paladins are devoted to
gods of good, a paladin's power comes as much from a
commitment to justice itself as it does from a god.
Paladins train for years to learn the skills of combat,
mastering a variety of weapons and armor. Even so,
their martial skills are secondary to the magical power
they wield: power to heal the sick and injured, to smite
the wicked and the undead, and to protect the innocent
and those who join them in the fight for justice.

BEYOND THE MUNDANE

LIFE

Almost by definition, the !ife of a paladin is an
adventuring !ife. Unless a lasting injury has taken him
ar her away from adventuring for a time, every paladin
!ives on the front !ines of the cosmic struggle against

PART I I CLASSES

Proficiency
Bonus

-Spell
Features

1st

Slots per Spell Level-

2nd

1st

+2

Divine Sense,

2nd

+2

Fighting

3rd

+2

Divine Health,

4th

+2

Ability Score Improvement

3

5th

+3

Extra Allack

4

2

6th

+3

Aura of Protection

4

2

3rd

Style, Spellcasting,
Sacred

3

7th

+3

Sacred

Oath feature

4

3

+3

Ability Score Improvement

4

3

9th

+4

10th

+4

4

3

2

Aura of Courage

4

3

2

4

3

3

4

3

3

11th

+4

Improved

12th

+4

Ability Score Improvement

13th

+5

14th

+5

Divine Smite

4

3

3

Touch

4

3

3
3

15th

+5

Sacred

Oath feature

4

3

16th

+5

Ability Score Improvement

4

3

3

17th

+6

4

3

3

18th

+6

Aura improvements

4

3

3

19th

+6

Ability Score Improvement

4

3

3

20th

+6

Sacred

4

3

3

Oath feature

evil. Fighters are rare enough among the ranks of the
militias and armies of the world, but even fewer people
can c1aim the true calling of a paladin. When they do
receive the call, these warriors turn from their former
occupations and take up arms to fight evil. Sometimes
their oaths lead them into the service of the crown as
leaders of elite groups of knights, but even then their
loyalty is first to the cause of righteousness, not to
crown and country.
Adventuring paladins take their work seriously. A
delve into an ancient ruin or dusty crypt can be a quest
driven bya higher purpose than the acquisition of
treasure. Evillurks in dungeons and primeval forests,
and even the smallest victory against it can tilt the
cosmic balance away from oblivion.

CREATING

5th

2

Divine Smite

Oath

8th

Cleansing

4th

Lay on Hands

A PALADIN

The most important aspect of a paladin character is
the nature of his or her holy quest. Although the c1ass
features related to your oath don't appear until you
reach 3rd levei, plan ahead for that choice by reading
the oath descriptions at the end of the c1ass. Are you a
devoted servant of good. loyal to the gods of justice and
honor, a holy knight in shining armor venturing forth
to smite evil? Are you a glorious champion of the light,
cherishing everything beautiful that stands against the
shadow, a knight whose oath descends from traditions
older than many of the gods? Or are you an embittered
loner sworn to take vengeance on those who have done
great evil, sent as an angel of death by the gods or driven
by your need for revenge? Appendix B lists many deities
worshiped by paladins throughout the multiverse, such

as Torm, Tyr, Heironeous,
Paladine, Kiri-Jolith, DoI
Arrah, the Silver Flame,
Bahamut, Athena, Re-Horakhty,
and Heimdall.
How did you experience your call to
serve as a paladin? Did you hear a whisper
from an unseen god or angel while you were at
prayer? Did another paladin sense the potentia! within
you and decide to train you as a squire? Or did some
terrible event-the destruction of your home, perhapsdrive you to your quests? Perhaps you stumbled into
a sacred grove or a hidden eIven enclave and found
yourself called to protect ali such refuges of goodness
and beauty. Or you might have known from your earliest
memories that the paladin's life was your calling, almost
as if you had been sent into the world with that purpose
stamped on your soul.
As guardians against the forces of wickedness,
paladins are rarely of any evil alignment. Most of them
walk the paths of charity and justice. Consider how your
alignment colors the way you pursue your holy quest
and the manner in which you conduct yourself before
gods and mortaIs. Your oath and alignment might be
in harmony, or your oath might represent standards of
behavior that you have not yet attained.
QUICK

BUILD

Vou can make a paIadin quickly by following these
suggestions. First, Strength should be your highest
ability score, followed by Charisma. Second, choose the
noble background.

PART I I CUSSES

CLASS FEATURES

FIGHTING

As a paladin, you gain the following class features.

At 2nd leveI, you adopt a style of fighting as your
specialty. Choose one of the following options. Vou can't
take a Fighting Style option more than once, even if you
later get to choose again.

HIT POINTS

Hit Dice: ldl0 per paladin leveI
Hit Points at 1st Levei: 10 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher Leveis: ldlO (or 6) + your
Constitution modifier per paladin level after 1st

STYLE

DEFENSE

While you are wearing armor, you gain a +1 bonus to AC.

PROFICIENCIES

DUELING

Armor: Ali armor, shields
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: None

When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and
no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls
with that weapon.

Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills: Choose two from Athletics, Insight, Intimidation,
Medicine, Persuasion, and Religion
EQUIPMENT

Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background:
(a) a martial weapon and a shield or (b) two martial
weapons
(a) fivejavelins or (b) any sim pIe melee weapon
(a) a priest's pack or (b) an explorer's pack
Chain mail and a holy symbol

DIVINE

SENSE

The presence of strong evil registers on your senses like
a noxious odor, and powerful good rings like heavenly
music in your ears. As an action, you can open your
awareness to detect such forces. Until the end of your
next turn, you know the location of any celestial, fiend,
or undead within 60 feet of you that is not behind total
cover. Vou know the type (celestial, fiend, or undead) of
any being whose presence you sense, but not its identity
(the vampire Count Strahd von Zarovich, for instance).
Within the same radius, you also detect the presence
of any place or object that has been consecrated or
desecrated, as with the hallow spell.
Vou can use this feature a number of times equal to
1 + your Charisma modifier. When you finish a long rest,
you regain ali expended uses.

LAY ON HANDS
Your blessed touch can heal wounds. Vou have a pool
of healing power that replenishes when you take a long
rest. With that pool, you can restore a total number of
hit points equal to your paladin leveI x 5.
As an action, you can touch a creature and draw
power from the pool to restore a number of hit points
to that creature, up to the maximum amount remaining
in your pool.
Alternatively, you can expend 5 hit points from your
pool of healing to cure the target of one disease or
neutralize one poison affecting it. Vou can cure multi pIe
diseases and neutralize multi pIe poisons with a single
use of Lay on Hands, expending hit points separately
for each one.
This feature has no effect on undead and constructs.

PART

1 I CLASSES

GREAT WEAPON

FIGHTING

When you roll a 1 or 2 on a damage die for an attack you
make with a melee weapon that you are wielding with
two hands, you can reroll the die and must use the new
roll. The weapon must have the two-handed or versatile
property for you to gain this benefit.
PROTECTION

When a creature you can see attacks a target other
than you that is within 5 feet of you, you can use your
reaction to impose disadvantage on the attack roll.
Vou must be wielding a shield.

SPELLCASTING
By 2nd levei, you have learned to draw on divine
magic through meditation and prayer to cast spells as
a cleric does. See chapter 10 for the general rules of
spellcasting and chapter 11 for the paladin spell listo
PREPARING

AND CASTING

SPELLS

The Paladin table shows how many spell slots you have
to cast your spells. To cast one of your paladin spells of
1st leveI or higher, you must expend a slot of the spell's
leveI or higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when
you finish a long resto
Vou prepare the list of paladin spells that are available
for you to cast, choosing from the paladin spelllist.
When you do so, choose a number of paladin spells
equal to your Charisma modifier + half your paladin
leveI, rounded down (minimum of one spell). The spells
must be of a leveI for which you have spell slots.
For example, if you are a 5th-leveI paladin, you have
four 1st-leveI and two 2nd-leveI spell slots. With a
Charisma of 14, your list of prepared spells can include
four spells of 1st or 2nd levei, in any combination. If you
prepare the 1st-levei spell cure wounds, you can cast
it using a 1st-leveI or a 2nd-leveI slot. Casting the spell
doesn't remove it from your list of prepared spells.
Vou can change your list of prepared spells when you
finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of paladin spells
requires time spent in prayer and meditation: at least I
minute per spelllevel for each spell on your list.
SPELLCASTING

ABILITY

Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your paladin
spells, since their power derives from the strength of

your convictions. Vou use your Charisma whenever a
spell refers to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you
use your Charisma modifier when setting the saving
throw DC for a paladin spell you cast and when making
an attack roll with one.
Spell save De ~ 8 + your proficiency
your (harisma

SPELLCASTING

bonus +

modifier

Focus

Vou can use a holy symbol (found in chapter 5) as a
spellcasting focus for your paladin spells.

DIVINE

SMITE

Starting at 2nd leveI, when you hit a creature with a
melee weapon attack, you can expend one paladin spell
slot to deal radiant damage to the target, in addition to
the weapon's damage. The extra damage is 2d8 for a
1st-levei spell slot, plus ld8 for each spelllevel higher
than 1st, to a maximum of 5d8. The damage increases
by ld8 if the target is an undead or a fiend.

DIVINE

HEALTH

By 3rd levei, the divine magic flowing through you
makes you immune to disease.

SACRED OATH
When you reach 3rd leveI, you swear the oath that binds
you as a paladin forever. Up to this time you have been
in a preparatory stage, committed to the path but not
yet sworn to it. Now you choose the Oath of Devotion,
the Oath of the Ancients, ar the Oath of Vengeance, all
detailed at the end of the c1ass description.
Your choice grants you features at 3rd leveI and again
at 7th, 15th, and 20th leveI. Those features include oath
spells and the Channel Divinity feature.
OATH SPELLS

Each oath has a list of associated spells. Vou gain
access to these spells at the leveIs specified in the oath
description. Once you gain access to an oath spell, you
always have it prepared. Oath spells don't count against
the number of spells you can prepare each day.
If you gain an oath spell that doesn't appear on the
paladin spelllist, the spell is nonetheless a paladin
spell for you.
CHANNEL

SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you reach 4th leveI, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability score of your
choice by 2, ar you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.

modifier

Spell attack modifier ~ your proficiency
your (harisma

bonus +

ABILITY

DIVINITY

Your oath allows you to channel divine energy to fuel
magical effects. Each ChanneI Divinity option provided
by your oath explains how to use it.
When you use your ChanneI Divinity, you choose
which option to use. Vou must then finish a short ar long
rest to use your Channel Divinity again.
Some Channel Divinity effects require saving throws.
When you use such an effect from this c1ass, the DC
equals your paladin spell save De.

EXTRA ATTACK
Beginning at 5th leveI, you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno

AURA OF PROTECTION
Starting at 6th leveI, whenever you ar a friendly creature
within 10 feet of you must make a saving throw, the
creature gains a bonus to the saving throw equal to your
Charisma modifier (with a minimum bonus of +1). Vou
must be conscious to grant this bonus.
At 18th levei, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet.

AURA OF COURAGE
Starting at 10th leveI. you and friendly creatures
within 10 feet of you can't be frightened while you
are conscious.
At 18th levei, the range of this aura increases to 30 feet.

IMPROVED DIVINE

SMITE

By 11th leveI, you are so suffused with righteous
rnight that ali your melee weapon strikes carry divine
power with them. Whenever you hit a creature with a
meIee weapon, the creature takes an extra ld8 radiant
damage. lf you also use your Divine Smite with an
attack, you add this damage to the extra damage of your
Divine Smite.

CLEANSING

TOUCH

Beginning at 14th leveI, you can use your action to
end one spell on yourself ar on one willing creature
that you touch.
Vou can use this feature a number of times equal
to your Charisma modifier (a minimum of once). Vou
regain expended uses when you finish a long rest.

SACRED OATHS
Becorning a paladin invoIves taking vows that commit
the paladin to the cause of righteousness, an active
path of fighting wickedness. The final oath, taken
when he ar she reaches 3rd levei, is the culmination
of ali the paladin's training. Some characters with this
c1ass don't consider themselves true paladins until
they have reached 3rd levei and made this oath. For
others, the actual swearing of the oath is a formality,
an official stamp on what has always been true in the
paladin's heart.

OATH OF DEVOTION
The Oath of Devotion binds a paladin to the loftiest
ideaIs of justice, virtue, and arder. Sometimes called
cavaliers, white knights. ar holy warriors, these
paladins meet the ideal of the knight in shining armar.
PAR1

I I CLASSES

4

acting with honor in pursuit of justice and the greater
good. They hold themselves to the highest standards of
conduct, and some, for better or worse, hold the rest of
the world to the same standards. Many who swear this
oath are devoted to gods of law and good and use their
gods' tenets as the measure of their devotion. They hold
angels-the perfect servants of good-as their ideaIs,
and incorporate images of angelic wings into their
helmets or coats of arms.
TENETS OF DEVOTION

Though the exact words and strictures of the Oath of
Devotion vary, paladins of this oath share these tenets.
Honesty. Don't lie or cheat. Let your word be
your promise.
Coural1e. Never fear to act, though caution is wise.
Compassion. Aid others, protect the weak, and
punish those who threaten them. Show mercy to your
foes, but temper it with wisdom.
Honor. Treat others with fairness, and let your
honorable deeds be an example to them. Do as
much good as possible while causing the least
amount ofharm.
Duty. Be responsible for your actions and their
consequences, protect those entrusted to your care,
and obey those who have just authority over you.

BREAKING

YOUR

OATH

••

A paladin tries to hold to the highest standards of conduct,
but even the most virtuous paladin is fallible. Sometimes
the right path proves toa demanding, sometimes a situation
calls for the lesser of two evils, and sometimes the heat of
emotion causes a paladin to transgress his ar her oath.
A paladin who has broken a vow typically seeks absolution
fram a eleric who shares his ar her faith ar from another
paladin of the same arder. The paladin might spend an ali.
night vigil in prayer as a sign of penitence, ar undertake a
fast ar similar act of self.denia!. After a rite of confession and
forgiveness, the paladin starts fresh.
If a paladin willfully violates his ar her oath and shows no
sign of repentance, the consequences can be more serious.
At the DM's discretion, an impenitent paladin might be
forced to abandon this elass and adopt another, ar perhaps
to take the Oathbreaker paladin option that appears in the

Dungeon Master's Cuide.

••

,.

reactions. For its action, it can use only the Dash action
or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from
moving. If there's nowhere to move, the creature can use
the Dodge action.
AURA OF DEVOTION

Starting at 7th levei, you and friendly creatures within
10 feet of you can't be charmed while you are conscious.
At 18th leveI,the range of this aura increases to 30 feet.

OATH SPELLS

Vou gain oath spells at the paladin leveIs listed.

PURITY OF SPIRIT

OATH

Beginning at 15th levei, you are always under the effects
of a protection {rom eviJ and gaad spell.

OF DEVOTION

Paladin Levei
3rd
5th
9th

13th
17th
CHANNEL

SPELLS

Spells

HOLY NIMBUS

protectionfrom evil and good, sanctuary
lesser restoration, zone oftruth
beacon ofhope, dispel magic
freedom of movement, guardian offaith
commune,jlame strike

At 20th levei, as an action, you can emanate an aura of
sunlight. For I minute, bright light shines from yau in a
30-foot radius, and dim light shines 30 feet beyond that.
Whenever an enemy creature starts its turo in the
bright light, the creature takes lO radiant damage.
In addition, for the duration, you have advantage on
saving throws against spells cast by fiends or undead.
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a long rest.

DIVINITY

When you take this oath at 3rd levei, you gain the
following two Channel Divinity options.
Sacred Weapon. As an action, you can imbue one
weapon that you are holding with positive energy,
using your Channel Divinity. For I minute, you add
your Charisma modifier to attack rolls made with that
weapon (with a minimum bonus of +1). The weapon also
emits bright light in a 20-foot radius and dim light 20
feel beyond that. 1fthe weapon is not already magical, it
becomes magical for the duration.
Vou can end this effect on your turn as part of any
other action. 1fyou are no longer holding or carrying
this weapon, or if you fali unconscious, this effect ends.
Turn the Unholy. As an action, you present your
holy symbol and speak a prayer censuring fiends and
undead, using your Channel Divinity. Each fiend or
undead that can see or hear you within 30 feet of you
must make a Wisdom saving throw. 1fthe creature
fails its saving throw, it is turned for I minute or until
it takes damage.
A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move
as far away from you as it can, and it can't willingly
move to a space within 30 feet of you. It also can't take
86

PART I I CLASSES

OATH OF THE ANCIENTS
The Oath of the Ancients is as old as the race af elves
and the rituais of the druids. Sometimes called fey
knights, green knights, or horned knights, paladins who
swear this oath cast their lot with the side of the light
in the cosmic struggle against darkness beca use they
love the beautiful and life-giving things of the world,
nat necessarily because they believe in principIes of
hanor, caurage, and justice. They adorn their armor and
clothing with images of growing things-Ieaves, antlers,
or flowers-to reflect their commitment to preserving
life and light in the world.
TENETS OF THE ANCIENTS

The tenets of the Oath of the Ancients have been
preserved for uncounted centuries. This oath
emphasizes the principies of good above any concerns
of law or chaos. Its faur central principies are simple.

symbol, and each fey or fiend within 30 feet of you that
can hear you must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a
failed save, the creature is turned for 1 minute or until it
takes damage.
A turned creature must spend its turns trying to move
as far away from you as it can, and it can't willingly
move to a space within 30 feet of you. lt also can't take
reactions. For its action, it can use only the Dash action
or try to escape fram an effect that prevents it from
moving. If there's nowhere to move, the creature can use
the Dodge action.
If the creature's true form is concealed by an illusion,
shapeshifting, or other effect, lhat form is revealed while
it is turned.
AURA OF WARDING

Beginning at 7th leveI, ancient magic lies so heavily
upon you that it forms an eldritch ward. Vou and friendly
creatures within 10 feet of you have resistance to
damage from spells.
At 18th leveI, the range of this aura increases to 30 feel.
Kindle the Light. Through your acts of mercy,
kindness, and forgiveness, kindle the light of hope in the
world, beating back despair.
Shelter the Light. Where there is good, beauty, love,
and laughter in the world, stand against the wickedness
that would swallow il. Where life fiourishes, stand
against the forces that would render it barren.
Preserve Your Own Light. Delight in song and
laughter, in beauty and arl. If you allow the light to die in
your own heart, you can't preserve it in the world.
Be the Light. Be a glorious beacon for ali who live in
despair. Let the light of your joy and courage shine forth
in ali your deeds.
OATH SPELLS

Vou gain oath spells at the paladin leveIs listed.
OATH

OF THE ANCIENTS

Paladin Levei

SPELLS

Spells

3rd
5th
9th

ensnaring strike, speak with animais
moonbeam, misty step
plant growth, protection from energy

13th
17th

ice storm, stoneskin
commune with nature, tree stride

CHANNEL

DIVINITY

When you take this oath at 3rd leveI, you gain the
following two Channel Divinity options.
Nature's Wrath. Vou can use your Channel Divinity
to invoke primeval forces to ensnare a foe. As an action,
you can cause spectral vines to spring up and reach
for a creature within 10 feet ofyou that you can see.
The creature must succeed on a Strength or Dexterity
saving throw (its choice) or be restrained. While
restrained by the vines, the creature repeats the saving
throw at the end of each of its turns. On a success, it
frees itself and the vines vanish.
Turn the Faithless. Vou can use your Channel
Divinity to utler ancient words that are painful for fey
and fiends to hear. As an action, you present your holy

UNDYING SENTINEL

Starting at 15th leveI, when you are reduced to O hit
points and are not killed oUlright, you can choose to
drop to 1 hit point instead. Once you use this ability, you
can't use it again until you finish a long resl.
Additionally, you suffer none of the drawbacks of old
age, and you can't be aged magically.
ELDER CHAMPION

At 20th levei, you can assume the form of an ancient
force of nature, taking on an appearance you choose.
For example, your skin might turn green or take on a
bark-like texture, your hair might become leafy or mosslike, or you might sprout antlers or a lion-like mane.
Using your action, you undergo a transformation.
For 1 minute, you gain the following benefits:
At the start of each ofyour turns, you rega in 10 hit
points.
Whenever you cast a paladin spell that has a casting
time of 1 action, you can cast it using a bonus action
instead.
Enemy creatures within 10 feet of you have disadvantage on saving throws against your paladin spells and
Channel Divinity options.
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a long resl.
OATH

OF VENGEANCE

The Oath ofVengeance is a solemn commitment to
punish those who have commitled a grievous sino When
evil forces slaughter helpless villagers, when an entire
people turns against the will of the gods. when a thieves'
guild grows toa violent and powerful, when a dragon
rampages through the countryside-at
times like these,
paladins arise and swear an Oath of Vengeance to set
right that which has gone wrong. To these paladinssometimes called avengers or dark knights-their own
purity is not as important as delivering justice.

PART I I CL~SSES

TENETS OF VENGEANCE

CHANNEL

The tenets of the Oath of Vengeanee vary by paladin, but
ali the tenets revolve around punishing wrongdoers by
any means neeessary. Paladins who uphold these tenets
are willing to saerifiee even their own righteousness to
mete out justice upon those who do evil, so the paladins
are often neutral or lawful neutral in alignmen!. The
core principIes of the tenets are brutally simple.
Fight the Greater Evil. Faeed with a ehoice of fighting
my sworn foes or eombating a Iesser evil, I ehoose the
greater evil.
No Merey for the Wieked. Ordinary foes might win
my merey, but my sworn enemies do no!.
By Any Means Neeessary. My qualms ean't get in the
way of exterminating my foes.
Restitution. ]f my foes wreak ruin on the world, it is
beca use I failed to stop them. I must help those harmed
by their misdeeds.

VOUgaln oath spells at the paladin leveis listed.

When you take this oath at 3rd leveI, you gain the
following two Channel Divinity options.
Abjure Enemy. As an aetion, you present your holy
symbol and speak a prayer of denunciation, using your
ChanneI Divinlty. Choose one ereature within 60 feet
of you that you ean see. That ereature must make a
Wisdom saving throw, unless it is immune to being
frightened. Fiends and undead have disadvantage on
this saving throw.
On a failed save, lhe ereature is frightened for I
minute or until It takes any damage. While frightened,
the ereature's speed is O, and It ean't benefit from any
bonus to its speed.
On a sueeessful save, the ereature's speed is halved
for I minute or until the ereature takes any damage.
VowofEnmity. As a bonus aetion, you ean utter a vow
of enmity against a ereature you ean see within 10 feet
of you, using your Channel Divinity. Vou gain advantage
on attaek rolls against lhe ereature for 1 minute or until
it drops to O hit points or falls uneonscious.

OATH

RELENTLESS

OATH SPELLS

OF VENGEANCE

Paladin Levei

SPELLS

Spells

3rd

bane, hunter's mark

5th
9th
13th
17th

hold person, misty step
haste, protection from energy
banishment, dimension door
hold monster, scrying

DIVINITY

AVENGER

By 7th leveI, your supernatural foeus helps you dose
off a foe's retrea!. When you hit a ereature with an
opportunity attaek, you ean move up to half your
speed immediately after the attaek and as part of
the same reaetion. This movement doesn't provoke
opportunityattaeks.
Sou L OF VENGEANCE

Starting at 15th leveI, the authority with which you
speak your Vow of Enmity gives you greater power over
your foe. When a ereature under the effeet of your Vow
of Enmity makes an attaek, you ean use your reaetion to
make a melee weapon attaek against that ereature if it is
within range.
AVENGING ANGEL

At 20th leveI, you ean assume the form of an
angelie avenger. Using your aetion, you undergo a
transformation. For I hour, you gain the following
benefits:
Wings sprout from your baek and grant you a fiying
speed of 60 fee!.
Vou emanate an aura of menaee in a 30-foot radius.
The first time any enemy ereature enters the aura or
starts its turn there during a battle, the ereature must
sueeeed on a Wisdom saving throw or beeome frightened of you for I minute or unti! it takes any damage.
Attaek rolls against the frightened ereature have
advantage.
Onee you use this feature, you ean't use it again unti!
you finish a long resto

88

PA RT 1 I CLASSES

RANGER
Rough and wild looking,
a human stalks alone
thraugh the shadows of
trees, hunting the orcs he
knows are planning a raid
on a nearby farm, Clutching
a shortsword in each hand,
he becomes a whirlwind of
steel, cutting down one enemy
after another.
After tumbling away from a cone of
freezing air, an elf finds her feet and draws
back her bow to loose an arrow aI the white
dragon. Shrugging off the wave of fear that emanates
from the dragon like the cold of its breath, she sends
one arrow after another to find the gaps between the
dragon's thick scales.
Holding his hand high, a half-elf whistles to the hawk
that circles high above him, calling the bird back to his
side. Whispering instructions in Elvish, he points to
the owlbear he's been tracking and sends the hawk to
distract the creature while he readies his bow.
Far fram the bustle of cities and towns, past the
hedges lhat shelter the most distant farms fram the
terrors of the wild, amid lhe dense-packed trees of
trackJess forests and across wide and empty plains,
rangers keep their unending watch.

I

DEADLY HUNTERS
Warriors of the wilderness, rangers specialize in
hunting the monsters that threaten the edges of
civilization-humanoid
raiders, rampaging beasts and
monstrasities, terrible giants, and deadly dragons. They
learn to track their quarry as a predator does, moving
stealthily thraugh the wilds and hiding lhemselves in
brush and rubble. Rangers focus their combat training
on techniques that are particularly useful against their
specific favored foes.
Thanks to their familiarity with the wilds, rangers
acquire the ability to cast spells that harness nature's
power, much as a druid does. Their spells, like their
combat abilities, emphasize speed, stealth, and the hunt.
A ranger's talents and abilities are honed with deadly
focus on the grim task of protecting lhe borderlands.

INDEPENDENT

ADVENTURERS

Though a ranger might make a living as a hunter, a
guide, or a tracker, a ranger's true calling is to defend
the outskirts of civilization fram lhe ravages of monsters
and humanoid hordes lhat press in from the wild. In
some places, rangers gather in secretive orders or join
forces with druidic circles. Many rangers, though, are
independent almost to a fault, knowing that, when a
dragon or a band of orcs attacks, a ranger might be lhe
first-and possibly the last-line of defense.
This fierce independence makes rangers well suited
to adventuring, since they are accustomed to life far
fram the comforts of a dry bed and a hot bath. Faced
with city-bred adventurers who grouse and whine about
the hardships of the wild, rangers respond with some
p" Rl I

I'

SE

89

Levei

Proficiency
Bonus

1st

+2

Favored Enemy, Natural Explorer

2nd

+2

3rd

+2

4th
5th

+2

6th
7th
8th

+3
+3
+3

1st

Fighting Style, Spellcasting
Ranger Archetype, Primeval Awareness

2

2

3

3

Ability Score Improvement
Extra Attack

3
4
4

3
4
4

5
5

4
4
4

Features

Favored Enemy and Natural Explorer improvements
Ranger Archetype feature
Ability Score Improvement, Land's Stride

9th

+3
+4

10th
11th

+4
+4

Natural Explorer improvement,
Ranger Archetype feature

12th
13th
14th

+4

Ability Score Improvement

15th
16th

+5
+5
+5

6

Favored Enemy improvement,
Ranger Archetype feature
Ability Score Improvement

Hide in plain Sight

Vanish

20th

6
7
7

4

8

4
4
4
4

8
9
9
10

17th
18th
19th

-Spell

Spells
Known

Feral Senses
Ability Score Improvement
Foe Slayer

10
11
11

4
4

4
4
4
4

Slots per Spell Level-

2nd

3rd

4th

5th

2
2
3
3
3

2

3
3

2
3

3
3
3
3

3
3
3
3

3
3

3
3

3

1

3
3

3
3

3
3

1
2

3

3

3

2

1
1
2
2

What made you join up with a band of adventurers?
Do you find it challenging to teach new allies the ways
of the wild, or do you welcome lhe relief from solitude
that they offer?
QUICK

mixture of amusement, frustration, and compassion.
But they quickly learn that other adventurers who can
carry their own weight in a fight against civilization's
foes are worth any extra burden. Coddled city folk might
not know how to feed themselves or find fresh water in
the wild, but they make up for it in other ways.

CREATING

A RANGER

As you create your ranger character, consider the nature
of the training that gave you your particular capabilities.
Did you train with a single mentor, wandering lhe wilds
together until you mastered the ranger's ways? Did you
leave your apprenticeship, or was your mentor slainperhaps by the same kind of monster that became your
favored enemy? Or perhaps you learned your skills as
part of a band of rangers affiliated with a druidic circle,
trained in mystic paths as well as wilderness lore. Vou
might be self-taught, a recluse who learned combat
skills, tracking, and even a magical connection to nature
through the necessity of surviving in the wilds.
What's the source of your particular hatred of a
certain kind of enemy? Did a monster kill someone
you loved or destroy your home village? Or did you see
toa much of lhe destruction these monsters cause and
commit yourself to reining in their depredations? [s
your adventuring career a continuation of your work
in protecting the borderlands, or a significant change?

90

PART 1 I CLASSES

BUILD

Vou can make a ranger quickly by following these
suggestions. First, make Dexterity your highest ability
score, followed by Wisdom. (Some rangers who focus
on two-weapon fighting make Strength higher than
Dexterity.) Second, choose the outlander background.

CLASS FEATURES
As a ranger, you gain the following class features.
HIT

POINTS

Hit Dice: 1dlO per ranger levei
Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 10 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: ldl0 (or 6) + your
Constitution modifier per ranger levei after 1st
PROFICIENCIES

Armor: Light armor, medium armor, shields
Weapons: Simple weapons, martial weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Strength, Dexterity
Skills: Choose three from Animal Handling,
Athletics, Insight, [nvestigation, Nature, Perception,
Stealth, and Survival
EQUIPMENT

Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background:

(a) scalemail or (b) leather armor
(a) two shortswords or (b) two sim pie melee weapons
(a) a dungeoneer's pack or (b) an explorer's pack
A longbow and a quiver of 20 arrows

ARCHERY

Vou gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls you make with
ranged weapons.
DEFENSE

FAVORED ENEMY
Beginning at 1st levei, you have significant experience
studying, tracking, hunting, and even talking to a certain
type of enemy.
Choose a type of favored enemy: aberrations,
beasts, celestiais, constructs, dragons, elementals, fey,
fiends, giants, monstrosities, oozes, plants, or undead.
Alternatively, you can select two races of humanoid
(such as gnolls and orcs) as favored enemies.
Vou have advantage on Wisdom (Survival) checks to
track your favored enemies, as well as on Intelligence
checks to recall information about them.
When you gain this feature, you also learn one
language of your choice that is spoken by your favored
enemies, if they speak one at alI.
Vou choose one additional favored enemy, as well as
an associated language, at 6th and 14th leveI. As you
gain leveis, your choices should reflect the types of
monsters you have encountered on your adventures.

NATURAL EXPLORER
Vou are particularly familiar with one type of natural
environment and are adept at traveling and surviving in
such regions. Choose one type of favored terrain: arctic,
coast, desert, forest, grassland, mountain, swamp,
or the Underdark. When you make an Intelligence or
Wisdom check related to your favored terrain, your
proficiency bonus is doubled if you are using a skill that
you're proficient in.
While traveling for an hour or more in your favored
terrain, you gain the following benefits:
Difticult terrain doesn't slow your group's traveI.
Your group can't become lost except by magical
means.
Even when you are engaged in another activity while
traveling (such as foraging, navigating, or tracking),
you remain alert to danger.
If you are traveling alone, you can move stealthily at
a normal pace.
When you forage, you find twice as much food as you
normally would.
While tracking other creatures, you also learn their
exact number, their sizes, and how long ago they
passed through the area.

While you are wearing armor, you gain a +I bonus to AC.
DUELING

When you are wielding a melee weapon in one hand and
no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls
with that weapon.
TWO-WEAPON

FIGHTING

When you engage in two-weapon fighting, you can add
your ability modifier to the damage of the second attack.

SPELLCASTING
By the time you reach 2nd levei, you have learned to
use the magical essence of nature to cast spells, much
as a druid does. See chapter 10 for the general rules of
spellcasting and chapter 11 for the ranger spell Iist.
SPELL SLOTS

The Ranger table shows how many spell slots you have
to cast your spells of 1st leveI and higher. To cast one of
these spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's leveI
or higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you
finish a long rest.
For example, if you know the 1st-levei spell animal
friendship and have a 1st-levei and a 2nd-leveI spell slot
available, you can cast animal friendship using either slot.
SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVE L AND HIGHER

Vou know two 1st-levei spells ofyour choice from the
ranger spelllist.
The Spells Known column of the Ranger table shows
when you learn more ranger spells of your choice. Each
of these spells must be of a levei for which you have

Vou choose additional favored terra in types aI 6th
and 10th leveI.

FIGHTING

STYLE

At 2nd levei, you adopt a particular style of fighting as
your specialty. Choose one of the following options.
Vou can't take a Fighting Style option more than once,
even if you later get to choose again.

9'

spell slots. For instance, when you reach 5th levei in this
c1ass, you can learn one new spell of 1st or 2nd leveI.
Additionally, when you gain a levei in this c1ass,
you can choose one of the ranger spells you know
and replace it with another spell from the ranger
spelllist, which also must be of a leveI for which you
have spell slots.

ABILITY

SPELLCASTING

EXTRA ATTACK

ABILITY

Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your ranger
spells, since your magic draws on your attunement to
nature. Vou use your Wisdom whenever a spell refers
to your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your
Wisdom modifier when setting the saving throw De for
a ranger spell you cast and when making an attack roll
with one.
Spell save De ~ 8 + your proficiency

bonus +

your Wisdom modifier
Spell altack modifier ~ your proficiency bonus +
your Wisdom modifier

SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th levei, you can increase one ability score of your
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.

Beginning at 5th leveI, you can attack twice, instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your turno

LAND'S STRIDE
Starting at 8th leveI, moving through nonmagical
difficult terra in costs you no extra movement. Vou can
also pass through nonmagical plants without being
slowed by them and without taking damage from them if
they have thorns, spines, or a similar hazard.
In addition, you have advantage on saving throws
against plants that are magically created or manipulated
to impede movement, such those created by the
entangle spell.

RANGER ARCHETYPE
At 3rd leveI, you choose an archetype that you strive
to emulate: Hunter or Beast Master, both detailed at
the end of the c1ass description. Your choice grants
you features at 3rd levei and again at 7th, 11th,
and 15th leveI.

PRIMEVAL AWARENESS
Beginning at 3rd levei, you can use your action and
expend one ranger spell slot to focus your awareness on
the region around you. For 1 minute per leveI of the spell
slot you expend, you can sense whether the following
types of creatures are present within 1 mile of you (or
within up to 6 miles if you are in your favored terra in):
aberrations, celestiais, dragons, elementals, fey, fiends,
and undead. This feature doesn't reveal the creatures'
location or number.

HIDE IN PLAIN SIGHT
Starting at 10th leveI, you can spend 1 minute creating
camouflage for yourself. Vou must have access to fresh
mud, dirt. plants. soot. and other naturally occurring
materiaIs with which to create your camouflage.
Once you are camouflaged in this way, you can try
to hide by pressing yourself up against a solid surface,
such as a tree or wall, that is at least as tall and wide
as you are. Vou gain a +10 bonus to Dexterity (Stealth)
checks as long as you remain there without moving or
taking actions. Once you move or take an action or a
reaction, you must camouflage yourself again to gain
this benefit.

VANISH
Starting at 14th levei, you can use the Hide action as a
bonus action on your turno AIso, you can't be tracked by
nonmagical means, unless you choose to leave a trail.

FERAL SENSES
At 18th levei, you gain preternatural senses that help
you fight creatures you can't see. When you attack a
creature you can't see, your inability to see it doesn't
impose disadvantage on your attack rolls against il.
Vou are also aware of the location of any invisible
creature within 30 feet of you, provided that the
creature isn't hidden from you and you aren't
blinded or deafened.

FOE SLAYER
At 20th levei, you become an unparalleled hunter of your
enemies. Once on each of your turns, you can add your
Wisdom modifier to the attack roll or the damage roll of
an attack you make against one of your favored enemies.
Vou can choose to use this feature before or after the
roll, but before any effects of the roll are applied.

RANGER ARCHETYPES
The ideal of the ranger has two classic expressions: the
Hunter and the Beast Master.

HUNTER
Emulating the Hunter archetype means accepting your
place as a bulwark between civilization and the terrors
of the wilderness. As you walk the Hunter's path, you
learn specialized techniques for fighting the threats
you face, from rampaging ogres and hordes of ores to
towering giants and terrifying dragons.
HUNTER'S

PREY

At 3rd levei, you gain one of the following features
of your choice.
C%ssus S/ayer. Your tenacity can wear down
the most potent foes. When you hit a creature with a
weapon attack, the creature takes an extra ld8 damage
if it's below its hit point maximum. Vou can deal this
extra damage only once per turno
Giant Ki//er. When a Large or larger creature within
5 feet of you hits or misses you with an attack, you can
use your reaction to attack that creature immediately
after its attack, provided that you can see the creature.
Horde Breaker. Once on each of your turns when you
make a weapon attack, you can make another attack
with the same weapon against a different creature that
is within 5 feet of the original target and within range
of your weapon.
DEFENSIVE

TACTICS

At 7th leveI, you gain one of the foIlowing features
of your choice.
Escape the Horde. Opportunity attacks against you
are made with disadvantage.
Mu/tiattack Defense. When a creature hits you
with an attack, you gain a +4 bonus to AC against
ali subsequent attacks made by that creature for the
rest of the turno
Stee/ Wi//. Vou have advantage on saving throws
against being frightened.
MULTIATTACK

At 11th levei, you gain one of the following features
of your choice.
Vo//ey. Vou can use your action to make a ranged
attack against any number of creatures within 10 feet
of a point you can see within your weapon's range. Vou
must have ammunition for each target, as normal, and
you make a separate attack roll for each target.
Whir/wind Attack. Vou can use your action to make a
melee attack against any number of creatures within 5
feet of you, with a separate attack roIl for each target.
SUPERIOR HUNTER'S

DEFENSE

At 15th levei, you gain one of the following features
of your choice.
Evasion. Vou can nimbly dodge out of the way of
certa in area effects, such as a red dragon's fiery breath
or a lightning bolt spel!. When you are subjected to an
effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving throw
to take only half damage, you instead take no damage

if you succeed on the saving throw, and only half
damage if you fai!'
Stand Against the Tide. When a hostile creature
misses you with a mele e attack, you can use your reaction
to force that creature to repeat the same attack against
another creature (other than itself) of your choice.
Uncanny Dodge. When an attacker that you can see
hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to
halve the attack's damage against you.

BEAST MASTER
The Beast Master archetype embodies a friendship
between the civilized races and the beasts of the world.
United in focus, beast and ranger work as one to fight
the monstrous foes that threaten civilization and the
wilderness alike. Emulating the Beast Master archetype
means committing yourself to this ideal, working in
partnership with all animal as its companion and friend.
RANGER'S COMPANION

At 3rd levei, you gain a beast companion that
accompanies you on your adventures and is trained to
fight alongside you. Choose a beast that is no larger than
Medium and that has a chaIlenge rating of 1/4 or lower
(appendix O presellts statistics for the hawk, mastiff,
and panther as examples). Add your proficiency bonus
to the beast's AC, attack roIls, and damage rolls, as weIl
as to any saving throws and skills it is proficient in. Its
hit poinl maximum equals its normal maximum or four
times your ranger leveI, whichever is higher.
The beast obeys your commands as best as it cano It
takes its turn on your initiative, though it doesn't take an
action unless you command it to. On your turn, you can
verbally command the beast where to move (no action
required by you). Vou can use your action to verbally
command it to take the Attack, Dash, Disengage, Dodge,
or Help action. Once you have the Extra Attack feature,
you can make one weapon attack yourself when you
command the beast to take the Attack action.
While traveling through your favored terrain with only
the beast, you can move stealthily at a normal pace.
lf the beast dies, you can obtain another one by
spending 8 hours magicaIly bonding with another beast
that isn't hostile to you, either the same type of beast as
before or a different one.
EXCEPTIONAL

TRAINING

Beginning at 7th levei, on any of your turns when
your beast companion doesn't attack, you can use a
bonus action to command the beast to take the Dash,
Disengage, Dodge, or Help action on its turno
BESTIAL FURY

Starting at 11th leveI, your beast companion can
make two attacks when you command it to use the
Attack action.
SHARE SPELLS

Beginning at 15th levei, when you cast a spell targeting
yourself, you can also affect your beast companion with
the spell if the beast is within 30 feet of YOU.

PART I I CL~SSES

93

ROGUE
Signaling for her companions to wait, a halfling creeps
forward through the dungeon hall. She presses an ear
to the door, then pulls out a set of tools and picks the
lock in the blink of an eye. Then she disappears into
the shadows as her fighter friend moves forward to kick
the door open.
A human lurks in the shadows of an alley while his
accomplice prepares for her part in the ambush. When
their target-a notorious slaver-passes the alleyway,
the accomplice cries out, the slaver comes to investigate,
and the assassin's blade cuts his throat before he can
make a sound.
Suppressing a giggle, a gnome waggles her fingers
and magically lifts the key ring from the guard's belt.
In a moment, the keys are in her hand, the cell door is
open, and she and her companions are free to make
their escape.
Rogues rely on skill, stealth, and their foes'
vulnerabilities to get the upper hand in any situation.
They have a knack for finding the solution to just about
any problem, demonstrating a resourcefulness and
versatility that is the cornerstone of any successful
adventuring party.

SKILL AND PRECISION
Rogues devote as much effort to mastering the use of
a variety of skills as they do to perfecting their combat
abilities, giving them a broad expertise that few other
characters can match. Many rogues focus on stealth and
deception, while others refine the skills that help them
in a dungeon environment, such as climbing, finding and
disarming traps, and opening locks.
When it comes to combat, rogues prioritize cunning
over brute strength. A rogue would rather make one
precise strike, placing it exactly where the attack will
hurt the target most, than wear an opponent down
with a barrage of attacks. Rogues have an almost
supernatural knack for avoiding danger, and a few learn
magical tricks to supplement their other abilities.

A SHADY LIVING
Every town and city has its share of rogues. Most of
them live up to the worst stereotypes of the class,
making a living as burglars, assassins, cutpurses, and
con artists. Often, these scoundrels are organized
into thieves' guilds or crime families. Plenty of rogues
operate independently, but even they sometimes
recruit apprentices to help them in their scams
and heists. A few rogues make an honest living as

9+

PART 1 I CLASSES

THE ROGUE

levei
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
20th

Proficiency Sneak
Bonus
Attack
1d6
+2
+2
+2
+2
+3
+3
+3
+3
+4
+4
+4
+4
+5
+5
+5
+5
+6
+6
+6
+6

1d6
2d6
2d6
3d6
3d6
4d6
4d6
5d6
5d6
6d6
6d6
7d6
7d6
8d6
8d6
9d6
9d6
10d6
10d6

Features
Expertise, Sneak Attack,
Thieves' Cant
Cunning Action
RoguishArchetype
AbilityScore Improvement
Uncanny Dodge
Experlise
Evasion

AbilityScore Improvement
RoguishArchetype feature
AbilityScore Improvemenl
ReliableTalent
AbilityScore Improvement
RoguishArchetype feature
Blindsense
Slippery Mind
AbilityScore Improvement
RoguishArchetype fealure
Elusive
AbilityScore Improvement
Stroke of luck

locksmilhs, invesligalors, or exlerminalors, which can
be a dangerous job in a world where dire rals-and
wererals-haunt
lhe sewers.
As adventurers, rogues fali on both sides of lhe law.
Some are hardened criminais who decide lo seek
lheir forlune in lreasure hoards, while olhers lake up
a tife of advenlure to escape from lhe law. Some have
learned and perfecled lheir skills wilh lhe exptieit
purpose of infillrating aneient ruins and hidden crypts
in search of treasure.

CREATING

A ROGUE

As you create your rogue character, consider the
character's relationship to the law. Do you have a
criminal past-or present? Are you on the run from the
law or from an angry thieves' guild master? Or did you
leave your guild in search of bigger risks and bigger
rewards? Is it greed that drives you in your adventures.
or some other desire or ideal?
What was the trigger that led you away from your
previous life? Did a great con or heist gone terribly
wrong cause you to reevaluate your career? Maybe
you were lucky and a successful robbery gave you the
coin you needed to escape the squalor ofyour !ife.
Did wanderlust finally call you away from your home?
Perhaps you suddenly found yourself cut off from your
family or your mentor, and you had to find a new means
of support. Or maybe you made a new friend-another
member of your aelventuring party-who showeel you
new possibilities for earning a tiving anel employing
your particular talents.

QUICK BUILD

You can make a rogue quickly by following
these suggestions. First. Dexterity should
be your highest ability score. Make
Intelligence your next-highest if you want to
excel at Investigation or plan to take up the
Arcane Trickster archetype. Choose Charisma
instead if you plan to emphasize deception and soeial
interaction. Second, choose the charlatan background.

CLASS FEATURES
As a rogue, you have the following cIass features.
HIT POINTS

Hil Diee: 1dS per rogue levei
Hil Poinls aI Is1 Levei: S + your Constitution modifier
Hil Poinls aI Higher LeveIs: 1dS (or 5) + your
Constitution modifier per rogue levei after 1st
PROFIClENCIES

Armor: Light armor
Weapons: Simple weapons, hand crossbows,
longsworels, rapiers, shortswords
Tools: Thieves' tools
Saving Throws: Dexterity, Intelligence
Skills: Choose four from Acrobatics, Athletics,
Deception, Insight, Intimidation, Investigation,
Perception, Pcrformance, Persuasion. Sleight of
Hanel, anel Stealth

PART 1

CLASSES

95

people in an area are easy marks or will provide a safe
house for thieves on the run.

CUNNING

ACTION

Starting at 2nd levei, your quick thinking and agility
allow you to move and act quickly. You can take a
bonus action on each of your turns in combat. This
action can be used only to take the Dash, Disengage,
or Hide action.

ROGUISH ARCHETYPE

EQUIPMENT

You start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background:
(a) a rapier or (b) a shortsword

(a) a shortbow and quiver of 20 arrows or (b) a
shortsword
(a) a burglar's pack, (b) a dungeoneer's pack, or (c) an
explorer's pack
Leather armor, two daggers, and thieves' tools

ABILITY

SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 10th, 12th,
16th, and 19th levei, you can increase one ability score
of your choice by 2, or you can increase two ability
scores of your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase
an ability score above 20 using this feature.

EXPERTISE

UNCANNY

At 1st leveI, choose two ofyour skill proficiencies, or
one of your skill proficiencies and your proficiency with
thieves' tooIs. Your proficiency bonus is doubled for any
ability check you make that uses either of the chosen
proficiencies.
At 6th levei, you can choose two more of your
proficiencies (in skills or with thieves' tools) to gain
this benefit.

Starting at 5th levei, when an attacker that you can see
hits you with an attack, you can use your reaction to
halve the attack's damage against you.

SNEAK ATTACK
Beginning at 1st levei, you know how to strike subtly
and exploit a foe's distraction. Once per turn, you can
deal an extra Id6 damage to one creature you hit with
an attack if you have advantage on the attack rol!. The
attack must use a finesse or a ranged weapon.
You don't need advantage on the attack roll if another
enemy of the target is within 5 feet of it, that enemy
isn't incapacitated, and you don't have disadvantage on
the attack rol!.
The amount of the extra damage increases as you
gain leveis in this class, as shown in the Sneak Attack
column of the Rogue table.

THIEVES'

CANT

During your rogue training you learned thieves' cant, a
secret mix of dialect, jargon, and code that allows you to
hide messages in seemingly normal conversation. Only
another creature that knows thieves' cant understands
such messages. lt takes four times longer to convey sue h
a message than it does to speak the same idea plainly.
In addition, you understand a set of secret signs and
symbols used to convey short, simple messages, such
as whether an area is dangerous or the territory of a
thieves' guild, whether loot is nearby, or whether the

96

At 3rd leveI, you choose an archetype that you emulate
in the exercise of your rogue abilities: Thief, Assassin,
or Arcane Trickster, ali detailed at the end of the class
description. Your archetype choice grants you features
at 3rd levei and then again at 9th, 13th, and 17th leve!.

PART I I CLASSES

DODGE

EVASION
Beginning at 7th levei, you can nimbly dodge out of the
way of certain area effects, such as a red dragon's fiery
breath or an ice storm spell. When you are subjected
to an effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving
throw to take only half damage, you instead take no
damage if you succeed on the saving throw, and only
half damage if you fai!'

RELIABLE T ALENT
By 11th levei, you have refined your chosen skills until
they approach perfection. Whenever you make an ability
check that lets you add your proficiency bonus, you can
treat a d20 roll of 9 or lower as a 10.

BLINDSENSE
Starting at 14th levei, ifyou are able to hear, you are
aware of the location of any hidden or invisible creature
within lO feet ofyou.

SLIPPERY MIND
By 15th leveI, you have acquired greater mental
strength. You gain proficiency in Wisdom saving throws.

ELUSIVE
Beginning at 18th levei, you are so evasive that
attackers rarely gain the upper hand against you. No
attack roll has advantage against you while you aren't
incapacitated.

STROKE OF LUCK
At 20th leveI, you have an uncanny knack for succeeding
when you need to. If your attack misses a target within
range, you can turn the miss into a hit. Alternatively, if
you fail an ability check, you can treat the d20 roll as a 20.
.Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a short or long resto

ROGUISH ARCHETYPES
Rogues have many features in common, including their
emphasis on perfecting their skills, their precise and
deadly approach to combat, and their increasingly quick
reflexes. But different rogues steer those talents in
varying directions, embodied by the rogue archetypes.
Vour choice of archetype is a reflection of your focusnot necessarily an indication of your chosen profession,
but a description of your preferred techniques.

THIEF
Vou hone your skills in the larcenous arts. Burglars,
bandits, cutpurses, and other criminais typically follow
this archetype, but so do rogues who prefer to think of
themselves as professional treasure seekers, explorers,
delvers, and investigators. In addition to improving your
agility and stealth, you learn skills useful for delving into
ancient ruins, reading unfamiliar languages, and using
magic items you normally couldn't employ.
FAST HANDS

Starting at 3rd leveI, you can use the bonus action
granted by your Cunning Action to make a Dexterity
(Sleight of Hand) check, use your thieves' tools to
disarm a trap or open a lock, or take the Use an
Object action.
SECOND-STORY

WORK

When you choose this archetype at 3rd levei, you gain
the ability to climb faster than normal; climbing no
longer costs you extra movement.
In addition, when you make a runningjump, the
distance you cover increases by a number of feet equal
to your Dexterity modifier.
SUPREME SNEAK

Starting at 9th levei, you have advantage on a Dexterity
(Stealth) check if you move no more than half your
speed on the same turn.

second turn at your initiative minus 10. Vou can't use
this feature when you are surprised.

ASSASSIN
Vou focus your training on the grim art of death. Those
who adhere to this archetype are diverse: hired killers,
spies, bounty hunters, and even specially anointed
priests trained to exterminate the enemies of their deity.
Stealth, poison, and disguise help you eliminate your
foes with deadly efficiency.
BONUS PROFICIENCIES

When you choose this archetype at 3rd levei, you gain
proficiency with the disguise kit and the poisoner's kit.
ASSASSINATE

Starting at 3rd levei, you are at your deadliest when you
get the drop on your enemies. Vou have advantage on
attack rolls against any creature that hasn't taken a turn
in the combat yet. In addition, any hit you score against
a creature that is surprised is a criticai hit.
INFILTRATION

EXPERTISE

Starting at 9th leveI, you can unfailingly create false
identities for yourself. Vou must spend seven days and
25 gp to establish the history, profession, and affiliations
for an identity. Vou can't establish an identity that
belongs to someone else. For example, you might acquire
appropriate clothing, letters of introduction, and officiallooking certification to establish yourself as a member of
a trading house from a remote city so you can insinuate
yourself into the company of other wealthy merchants.
Thereafter, if you adopt the new identity as a disguise,
other creatures believe you to be that person until given
an obvious reason not to.
IMPOSTOR

At 13th leveI, you gain the ability to unerringly mimic
another person's speech, writing, and behavior.
Vou must spend at least three hours studying
these three components of the person's behavior,
listening to speech, examining handwriting, and
observing mannerisms.
Vour ruse is indiscernible to the casual observer. Ir a
wary creature suspects something is amiss, you have
advantage on any Charisma (Deception) check you make
to avoid detection.
DEATH STRIKE

By 13th leveI, you have learned enough about the
workings of magic that you can improvise the use of
items even when they are not intended for YOU. Vou
ignore ali class, race, and levei requirements on the use
of magic items.

Starting at 17th leveI, you become a master of instant
death. When you attack and hit a creature that is
surprised, it must make a Constitution saving throw
(DC 8 + your Dexterity modifier + your proficiency
bonus). On a failed save, double the damage of your
attack against the creature.

THIEF'S

ARCANE TRICKSTER

USE MAGIC DEVICE

REFLEXES

When you reach 17th levei, you have become adept at
laying ambushes and quickly escaping danger. Vou can
take two turns during the first round of any combat. Vou
take your first turn at your normal initiative and your

Some rogues enhance their fine-honed skills of stealth
and agility with magic, learning tricks of enchantment
and illusion. These rogues include pickpockets and
burglars, but also pranksters, mischief-makers, and a
significant number of adventurers.

PART 1

CLASSES

9i

SPELLCASTING

ARCANE

When you reach 3rd levei, you gain the ability to
cast spells. See chapter 10 for the general rules of
spellcasting and chapter 1i for the wizard spelllisl.
Cantrips. Vou learn three cantrips: mage hand and
two other cantrips of your choice fram the wizard spell
lisl. Vou learn another wizard cantrip of your choice
at 10th leveI.
Spel1 S/ots. The Arcane Trickster Spellcasting
table shows how many spell slots you have to cast
your spells of 1st levei and higher. To cast one of these
spells, you must expend a slot of the spell's leveI or
higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you
finish a long rest.
For example. ifyou know the Ist.level spell charm
person and have a Ist.level and a 2nd.level spell slot
available, you can cast charm person using either slol.
Spel1s Known of 1st.Level and Higher. Vou know
three I st.level wizard spells of your choice, two of which
you must choose from the enchantment and iIIusion
spells on the wizard spell lisl.
The Spells Known column of the Arcane Trickster
Spellcasting table shows when you learn more wizard
spells of 1st levei ar higher. Each of these spells must
be an enchantment or illusion spell of your choice, and
must be of a levei for which you have spell slots. For
instance, when you reach 7th levei in this c1ass. you can
learn one new spell of 1st or 2nd leveI.
The spells you learn at 8th. 14th, and 20th levei can
come fram any school of magic.
Whenever you gain a levei in this c1ass, you can
replace one of the wizard spells you know with another
spell of your choice from the wizard spell lisl. The
new spell must be of a levei for which you have spell
slots. and it must be an enchantment or illusion spell,
unless you're replacing the spell you gained at 8th, 14th,
ar 20th leveI.
Spel1casting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcasting
ability for your wizard spells, since you learn your
spells thraugh dedicated study and memorization.
Vou use your lntelligence whenever a spell refers to
your spellcasting ability. In addition, you use your
Intelligence modifier when setting the saving thraw
DC for a wizard spell you cast and when making an
allack rall with one.
Spell save De ~ 8 + your proficiency bonus +
your Intelligence modifier
Spell altack modifier ~ your proficiency bonus +
your Intelligence modifier
MACE HAND LEGERDEMAIN

Starting at 3rd levei, when you cast mage hand, you can
make the spectral hand invisible. and you can perform
the following additionaltasks with it:
Vou can stow one objectthe hand is holding in a
container worn ar carried by another creature.
Vou can retrieve an object in a container worn or
carried by another creature.
Vou can use thieves' tools to pick locks and disarm
traps at range.

98

PA RT 1

CLASSES

TRICKSTER

SPELLCASTINC

Rogue
Levei

Cantrips

Spells

-Spell

Slots per Spell Level-

Known

Known

1st

2nd

3rd
4th

3

3
4
4
4

2

5th
6th
7th

3
3
3
3

8th

3

9th
10th
11th

3
4
4

8

12th
13th
14th

4
4
4

15th

4
4

8
9
10
10

5
6
6
7

4th

3
3
3
4
4
4
4
4

2
2
2
3

4
4

3
3
3

2

4
4

3
3

2
2

4

11

4
4

3
3

3
3

18th

4

19th
20th

4
4

11
12
13

4
4
4

3
3
3

3
3
3

16th
17th

11

3rd

Vou can perform one of these tasks without being
noticed by a creature if you succeed on a Dexterity
(Sleight of Hand) check contested by the creature's
Wisdom (Perception) check.
In addition, you can use the bonus action granted by
your Cunning Action to contralthe hand.
MAGICAL AMBUSH

Starting at 9th levei, if you are hidden from a
creature when you cast a spell on it, the creature has
disadvantage on any saving throw it makes againstthe
spellthis turno
VERSATILE

TRICKSTER

At 13th leveI, you gain the ability to distracttargets with
your mage hand. As a bonus action on your turn, you can
designate a creature within 5 feet of the spectral hand
created by the spell. Doing so gives you advantage on
allack ralls against that creature untilthe end of the turno
SPELL THIEF

At 17th levei, you gain the ability to magically
stealthe knowledge of how to cast a spell fram
another spellcaster.
Immediately after a creature casts a spellthattargets
you ar includes you in its area of effect, you can use your
reaction to force the creature to make a saving thraw
with its spellcasting ability modifier. The DC equals
your spell save De. On a failed save, you negate the
spell's effect against you, and you stealthe knowledge
of the spell if it is at least 1st leveI and of a levei you can
cast (it doesn't need to be a wizard spell). For the next
8 hours, you know the spell and can cast it using your
spell slolS. The crealure can't casl lhat spell untilthe
8 hours have passed.
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a long resl.

SORCERER
Golden eyes flashing, a human
stretches out her hand and unleashes
the dragonfire that burns in her veins.
As an inferno rages around her foes,
leathery wings spread from her back and
she takes to the air.
Long hair whipped bya conjured wind,
a half.elf spreads his arms wide and throws
his head back. Lifting him momentarily off
the ground. a wave of magic surges up in him,
through him, and out from him in a mighty blast
of lightning.
Crouching behind a stalagmite, a halfling points a
finger at a charging troglodyte. A blast of fire springs
from her finger to strike the creature. She ducks back
behind the rock formation with a grin, unaware that her
wild magic has turned her skin bright blue.
Sorcerers carry a magical birthright conferred
upon them by an exotic bloodline, some otherworldly
influence. or exposure to unknown cosmic forces.
One can't study sorcery as one learns a language, any
more than one can learn to live a legendary life. No one
chooses sorcery; the power chooses the sorcerer.

RAW MAGIe
Magic is a part of every sorcerer. suffusing body, mind,
and spirit with a latent power that waits to be tapped.
Some sorcerers wield magic that springs from an
ancient bloodline infused with the magic of dragons.
Others carry a raw, uncontrolled magic within them,
a chaotic storm that manifests in unexpected ways.
The appearance of sorcerous powers is wildly
unpredictable. Some draconic bloodlines produce
exactly one sorcerer in every generation, but in other
lines of descent every individual is a sorcerer. Most
of the time, the talents of sorcery appear as apparent
flukes. Some sorcerers can't name the origin of their
power, while others trace it to strange events in their
own lives. The touch of a demon, the blessing of a
dryad at a baby's birth, or ataste of the water from
a mysterious spring might spark the gift of sorcery.
So toa might the gift of a deity of magic, exposure
to the elemental forces of the [nner Planes or the
maddening chaos of Limbo, or a glimpse into the
inner workings of reality.
Sorcerers have no use for the spellbooks and ancient
tomes of magic lore that wizards rely on. nor do they
rely on a patron to grant their spells as warlocks do.
By learning to harness and channel their own inborn
magic, they can discover new and staggering ways
to unleash that power.

UNEXPLAINED

POWERS

Sorcerers are rare in the world, and it's unusual to find
a sorcerer who is not involved in the adventuring life
in some way. People with magical power seething in
their veins soon discover that the power doesn't like to
stay quiet. A sorcerer's magic wants to be wielded. and
it has a tendency to spill out in unpredictable ways if
it isn't called on.
PART I

n ~SSFS

1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th
9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th
19th
20th

Proficiency Sorcery
Cantrips Spells
Bonus
Points Features
Known Known 1st
2
spellcasting,sorcerous
4
2
+2
Origin
2
Font of Magic
4
3
3
+2
Metamagic
4
4
4
+2
3
4
4
Abilityscore Improvement
5
5
+2
4
+3
5
5
6
4
sorcerous Origin feature
5
7
+3
6
4
7
5
8
+3
4
AbilityScore Improvement
5
9
+3
8
5
10
4
+4
9
11
4
10
Metamagic
6
+4
11
12
4
6
+4
4
12
AbilityScore Improvement
6
12
+4
13
4
+5
13
6
4
14
sorcerous Origin feature
6
13
+5
4
15
6
14
+5
14
4
16
AbilityScore Improvement
6
+5
4
17
Metamagic
6
15
+6
15
4
18
sorcerous Origin feature
6
+6
4
19
Abilityscore Improvement
6
15
+6
15
4
20
Sorcerous Restoration
6
+6

Sorcerers often
have obscure or quixotic
motivations driving them
to adventure. Some seek a greater
understanding of the magical force that infuses
them, or the answer to the mystery of its origino Others
hope to find a way to get rid of it, or to unleash its full
potential. Whatever their goals, sorcerers are every bit
as useful to an adventuring party as wizards, making
up for a compara tive lack of breadth in their magical
knowledge with enormous flexibility in using the
spells they know,

CREATING

A SORCERER

The most important question to consider when creating
your sorcerer is the origin of your power. As a starting
character, you'lI choose an origin that ties to a draconic
bloodline or the influence of wild magic, but the exact
source of your power is up to you to decide. Is it a family
curse, passed down to you from distant ancestors? ar
did some extraordinary event leave you blessed with
inherent magic but perhaps scarred as well?
How do you feel about the magical power coursing
through you? Do you embrace it, try to master it, or
revel in its unpredictable nature? Is it a blessing or
a curse? Did you seek it out, or did it find you? Did
you have the option to refuse it, and do you wish you
had? What do you intend to do with it? Perhaps you
feellike you've been given this power for some lofty
purpose. ar you might decide that the power gives you
the right to do what you want, to take what you want
from those who lack such power, Perhaps your power

PART I I CLASSES
100

-Spell Slots per Spell Level2nd

3rd

4th

2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

1
2
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3

5th

1
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
3
3
3

6th

7th

8th

9th

1

1
1
1

1
1
1
1
2
2

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
2

links you to a powerful individual in the world-the fey
creature that blessed you at birth, the dragon who put
a drop of its blood into your veins, the lich who created
you as an experiment, or the deity who chose you to
carry this power.
QUICK

BUILD

Vou can make a sorcerer quickly by following these
suggestions. First, Charisma should be your highest
ability score, followed by Constitution. Second,
choose the hermit background. Third, choose the
light, prestidigitation, ray of frost, and shocking grasp
cantrips, along with the 1st-levei spells shield and
magic missile.

CLASS FEATURES
As a sorcerer, you gain the following c1ass features.
HIT POINTS

Hit Dice: Id6 per sorcerer levei
Hit Points at 1st Levei: 6 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher Leveis: Id6 (or 4) + your
Constitution modifier per sorcerer leveI after 1st
PROFICIENCIES

Armar: Nane
Weapons: Daggers, darts, slings, quarterstaffs,
light crossbows
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Constitution, Charisma
Skills: Choose two from Arcana, Deception, Insight,
Intimidation, Persuasion, and Religion

EQUIPMENT

SPELLCASTING

Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your background:

Vou can use an arcane focus (found in chapter 5) as a
spellcasting focus for your sorcerer spells.

(a) a light crossbow and 20 bolts or (b) any simple
weapon
(a) a component pouch or (b) an arcane focus
(a) a dungeoneer's pack or (b) an explorer's pack
Two daggers

SPELLCASTING
An event in your past, or in the life of a parent or
ancestor, left an indelible mark on you, infusing you with
arcane magic. This font of magic, whatever its origin,
fuels your spells. See chapter 10 for the general rules of
spellcasting and chapter 11 for the sorcerer spelllist.
CANTRIPS

At 1st leveI, you know four cantrips of your choice from
the sorcerer spelllist. Vou learn additional sorcerer
cantrips of your choice at higher leveis, as shown in the
Cantrips Known column of the Sorcerer table.
SPELL SLOTS

The Sorcerer table shows how many spell slots you
have to cast your spells of 1st levei and higher. To cast
one of these sorcerer spells, you must expend a slot of
the spell's levei or higher. Vou regain ali expended spell
slots when you finish a long rest.
For example, if you know the 1st-levei spell burning
hands and have a 1st-levei and a 2nd-levei spell slot
available, you can cast burning hands using either slot.
SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVEL AND HWHER

Vou know two 1st-levei spells of your choice from the
sorcerer spelllist.
The Spells Known column of the Sorcerer table
shows when you learn more sorcerer spells of your
choice. Each of these spells must be of a levei for which
you have spell slots. For instance, when you reach 3rd
levei in this c1ass, you can learn one new spell of 1st
or 2nd leveI.
Additionally, when you gain a levei in this c1ass,
you can choose one of the sorcerer spells you know
and replace it with another spell from the sorcerer
spelllist, which also must be of a levei for which you
have spell slots.
SPELLCASTING

ABILITY

Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your sorcerer
spells, since the power of your magic relies on your
ability to project your will into the world. Vou use your
Charisma whenever a spell refers to your spellcasting
ability. In addition. you use your Charisma modifier
when setting the saving throw DC for a sorcerer spell
you cast and when making an attack roll with one.
Spell save DC~ 8 + your proficiencybonus +
your Charisma modifier
Spell attack modifier~ your proficiencybonus +
your Charisma modifier

Focus

SORCEROUS ORIGIN
Choose a sorcerous origin, which describes the
source of your innate magical power: Draconic
Bloodline or Wild Magic, both detailed at the end of the
c1ass description.
Your choice grants you features when you choose it at
1st leveI and again at 6th, 14th, and 18th leveI.

FONT OF MAGIC
At 2nd levei, you tap into a deep wellspring of magic
within yourself. This wellspring is represented by
sorcery points, which allow you to create a variety of
magical effects.
SORCERY POINTS

Vou have 2 sorcery points, and you gain more as you
reach higher leveis. as shown in the Sorcery Points
column of the Sorcerer table. You can never have
more sorcery points than shown on the table for your
leveI. Vou regain ali spent sorcery points when you
finish a long rest.
FLEXIBLE CASTING

Vou can use your sorcery points to gain additional spell
slots. or sacrifice spell slots to gain additional sorcery
points. Vou learn other ways to use your sorcery points
as you reach higher leveis.
Creating Spel1 S/ots. Vou can transform unexpended
sorcery points into one spell slot as a bonus action on
your turno The Creating Spell Slots table shows the cost
of creating a spell slot of a given leveI. Vou can create
spell slots no higher in leveI than 5th.
CREATlNC

SPELL

SLOTS

Spell Slot
Levei

Sorcery
Point Cost

1st

2

2nd
3rd

3

4th

5th

5
6
7

Converting a Spel1 S/ot to Sorcery Points. As a
bonus action on your turn, you can expend one spell
slot and gain a number of sorcery points equal to the
slot's leveI.

METAMAGIC
At 3rd levei, you gain the ability to twist your spells
to suit your needs. Vou gain two of the following
Metamagic options of your choice. Vou gain another one
at 10th and 17th leveI.
Vou can use only one Metamagic option on a spell
when you cast it, unless otherwise noted.

PART I

(I

'SSES
101

CAREFUL SPELL

When you cast a spell that forces other creatures to make
a saving throw, you can protect some of those creatures
from the spell's full force. To do 50, you spend 1 sorcery
point and choose a number of those creatures up to your
Charisma modifier (minimum of one creature). A chosen
creature automatically succeeds on its saving throw
against the spell.
DISTANT SPELL

When you cast a spell that has a range of 5 feet ar
greater, you can spend 1 sorcery point to double the
range of the spell.
When you cast a spell that has a range of touch, you
can spend 1 sorcery point to make the range of the
spell 30 feel.
EMPOWERED SPELL

When you roll damage for a spell, you can spend 1
sorcery point to reroll a number of the damage dice up
to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one). Vou must
use the new rolls.
Vou can use Empowered Spell even if you have
already used a different Metamagic option during the
casting of the spell.
EXTENDED SPELL

When you cast a spell lhat has a duration of 1 minute
ar longer. you can spend 1 sorcery point to double its
duration, to a maximum duration of 24 hours.
HEIGHTENED

SPELL

When you cast a spell lhat forces a creature to make a
saving throw to resist its effects, you can spend 3sorcery
points to give one target of the spell disadvantage on its
first saving throw made against the spell.
QUICKENED

SPELL

When you cast a spell that has a casting time of 1 action,
you can spend 2 sorcery points to change the casting
time to 1 bonus action for this casting.

SORCEROUS RESTORATION
At 20th levei, you regain 4 expended sorcery points
whenever you finish a short resl.

SORCEROUS

ORIGINS

Different sorcerers c1aim different origins for their
innate magic. Although many variations exist, most
of these origins fali into two categories: a draconic
bloodline and wild magic.

DRACONIC

BLOODLINE

Vour innate magic comes from draconic magic that was
mingled with your blood ar that of your ancestors. Most
often, sorcerers with this origin trace their descent
back to a mighty sorcerer of ancient times who made a
bargain with a dragon ar who might even have c1aimed
a dragon parenl. Some of these bloodlines are well
established in the world, but most are obscure. Any
given sorcerer could be the first of a new bloodline, as a
result of a pact ar some other exceptional circumstance.
DRAGON ANCESTOR

At 1st levei, you choose one type of dragon as your
ancestor. The damage type associated with each dragon
is used by features you gain later.
DRACONIC

ANCESTRY

Dragon

DamageType

Black

Acid

Blue

Lightning

Brass

Fire

Bronze

Lightning

Copper

Acid

Gold

Fire

Green

Poison

Red

Fire

Silver

Cold

White

Cold

SUBTLE SPELL

When you cast a spell, you can spend 1 sorcery point to
cast it without any somatic ar verbal components.
TWINNED

SPELL

When you cast a spell that targets only one creature and
doesn't have a range of self, you can spend a number of
sorcery points equal to the spell's levei to target a second
creature in range with the same spell (I sorcery point if
the spell is a cantrip).

ABILITY

SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th levei, you can increase one ability score of your
choice by 2, ar you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by I. As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.

PART
102

I I CLASSES

Vou can speak, read, and write Draconic. Additionally,
whenever you make a Charisma check when interacting
with dragons, your proficiency bonus is doubled if it
applies to the check.
DRACONIC

RESILIENCE

As magic f10ws through your body, it causes physical
traits of your dragon ancestors to emerge. At 1st levei,
your hit point maximum increases by 1 and increases by
1 again whenever you gain a levei in this c1ass.
Additionally, parts of your skin are covered by a thin
sheen of dragon-Iike scales. When you aren't wearing
armar, your AC equals 13 + your Dexterity modifier.
ELEM ENTAL AFFIN ITY

Starting at 6th levei, when you cast a spell thal deals
damage of the type associated with your draconic
ancestry, add your Charisma modifier to that damage.
At the same time, you can spend 1 sorcery point to gain
resistance to that damage type for 1 hour.

DRAGON WINGS

At 14th levei, you gain the ability to sprout a pair of
dragon wings from your back, gaining a flying speed
equal to your current speed. You can create these wings
as a bonus action on your turno They last until you
dismiss them as a bonus action on your turno
You can't manifest your wings while wearing armor
unless the armor is made to accommodate them, and
clothing not made to accommodate your wings might
be destroyed when you manifest them.
DRACONIC

PRESENCE

Beginning at 18th leveI, you can channel the dread
presence of your dragon ancestor, causing those around
you to become awestruck or frightened. As an action,
you can spend 5 sorcery points to draw on this power
and exude an aura of awe or fear (your choice) to a
distance of 60 feel. For I minute or until you lose your
concentration (as if you were casting a concentration
spell), each hostile creature that starts its turn in this
aura must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or be
charmed (if you chose awe) or frightened (if you chose
fear) until the aura ends. A creature that succeeds on
this saving throw is immune to your aura for 24 hours.
WILD MAGIC
Your innate magic comes from the wild forces of chaos
that underlie the order of creation. You might have
endured exposure to some form of raw magic, perhaps
through a planar portalleading to Limbo, the Elemental
Planes, or lhe mysterious Far Realm. Perhaps you
were blessed by a powerful fey creature or marked bya
demon. Or your magic could be a fluke of your birth, with
no apparent cause or reason. However it carne to be, this
chaotic magic churns within you, waiting for any outlel.
WILD MAGIC SURGE

Starting when you choose this origin at 1st levei, your
spellcasting can unleash surges of untamed magic.
lmmediately after you cast a sorcerer spell of 1st levei
or higher, the DM can have you roll a d20. If you roll a
I, roll on the Wild Magic Surge table to create a random
magical effect.
TIDES OF CHAOS

Starting at 1st levei, you can manipulate the forces of
chance and chaos to gain advantage on one attack roll,
ability check, or saving throw. Once you do sO. you must
6nish a long rest before you can use this feature again.
Any time before you regain the use of lhis feature, the
DM can have you roll on the Wild Magic Surge table
immediately after you cast a sorcerer spell of I st levei or
higher. You then regain the use of this feature.
BEND LUCK

Starting at 6th levei, you have the ability to twist fate
using your wild magic. When another creature you can
see makes an attack roll, an ability check, or a saving
throw, you can use your reaction and spend 2 sorcery
points to roll Id4 and apply the number rolled as a
bonus or penalty (your choice) to the creature's roll. You

can do so after the creature rolls but before any effects
of the roll occur.
CONTROLLED

CHAOS

At 14th levei, you gain a modicum of control over the
surges of your wild magic. Whenever you roll on the
Wild Magic Surge table, you can roll twice and use
either number.
SPELL BOMBARDMENT

Beginning at 18th leveI, the harmful energy of your
spells intensifies. When you roll damage for a spell and
roll the highest number possible on any of lhe dice,
choose one of those dice, roll it again and add that roll to
the damage. You can use the feature only once per turno

~dv:::;::========================r~,
WILD

MAGIC

dl00

Effect

SURGE

01-02

RolI on this table at the start of each ofyour
the next minute,

ignoring

turns

for

this result on subsequent

dl00

Effect

45-46

You cast

levita te on yourself.

47-48

A unicorn

controlled

rolls.
03-04

within

For the next minute,

you can see any invisible

creature

49-50

if you have line of sight to it.
05-06

A modron

chosen

and controlled

in an unoccupied
disappears
07-08

by the DM appears

51-52

space within 5 feet of you, then

1 minute

spell centered

magic missile as a 5th.level

You cast

RolI a d10. Your height

53-54

on

changes

spell.

55-56

by a number

ofinches

equal to the roll. If the roll is odd, you shrink.

57-58

confusion centered

You cast

15-16

For the next minute,

17-18

You grow a long beard made of feathers

on yourself.

you regain 5 hit points

at the

start of each of your turns.

until you sneeze,

that remains

at which point the feathers

grease centered

Creatures

have disadvantage

Your skin turns

An eye appears

(Perception)

on saving throws

shade

on your forehead

that

against

A remove curse

ofblue.

You castfog

Up to three creatures

69-70

on Wisdom

time of 1 bonus

You are transported

take 4d10 lightning

damage.

You are frightened

by the nearest

Each creature

lhe

or casts

invisibility

A random

creature

within 60 feet of you becomes

poisoned

for 1d4 hours.

75-76

You glow with bright light in a 30.foot

feet ofyou
77-78

You cast

Any creature
is blinded

throw, you turn into a sheep

within

damage.

You regain hit points

necrotic

damage

Vou cast mirror image.

87-88

You castf1y on a random

equal to the roll. If the roll is odd, you get younger

89-90

You become

(minimum

1 year old). Ifthe

1d6 flumphs

controlled

unoccupied

spaces

frightened

of you. lhey

39-40

You regain

2d10 hit points.

41-42

You turn into a potled

roll is even, you get older.

by the DM appear

93-94

For the next minute,

you can teleport

a bonus action on each cf your turns.

within 60 feet ofyou.

can't hear you. lhe

During that
invisibility

and

reverts.

back to life as if by the

Your size increases

you immediately

reincarnate spell.

by one size category

for the next

minute.
95-96

You and ali creatures
vulnerability

If you drop to O hit

and your form

creature

If you die within the next minute,
come

plant until the start of your

your pot breaks,

equal to the sum of the

ends if you atlack or cast a spell.
91-92

vanish after 1 minute.

to ali damage.

immediately.
takes 1d10 necrotic

invisible for the next minute.

time, other creatures

in

within 60 feet of you and are

next turno While a plant, you are incapacitated
have vulnerability

duration.

flutter in the air

dealt.

85-86
by a number

action

within 30 feet ofyou

ofyears

RolI a d10. Your age changes

for the spell's

10 feet of you for the next minute.

Each creature

spell you

next turno

If you fail the saving

and flower petals

You can take one additional

space if that space is occupied.

radius for the

until the end ofits

po/ymorph on yourself.

IlIusory butlerflies

for the next minute.

that ends its turn within 5

81-82

cast within the next minute.

invisible

ends on a creature

73-74

79-80

next damaging

until the

a spell.

83-84

ofthe

creature

within 30 feet of you becomes

end of your next turn, after which time you return

the damage

within 30 feet of you

next turno

to the space you previously

Maximize

on yourself.

you choose

to ali damage

space of

or the nearest

spell 5101.
when you speak.

You gain resistance

to the Astral Plane until the

occupied

creature

71-72

time

action.

expended

c10ud centered

next minute.

up to 60 feet to an unoccupied

object you touch

by another

you must shout

for the next minute.

for the next minute.

ali your spells with a casting

have a casting

unoccupied

104

for

into flame.

65-66

involves

your choice that you can see.

points,

by alcohol

any flammable

63-64

that rely on sight.

For the next minute,

You teleport

For the next minute,

when it atlacks
a vibrant

checks

of 1 action

43-44

to being intoxicated

Your hair falls out but grows back within 24 hours.

end ofyour

During that time, you have advantage

37-38

You are immune

For the next minute,

on yourself.

spell can end this effect.

35-36

hovers near you for the next minute,
to AC and immunity to magic

shield

you a +2 bonus

You regain your lowest.level

a saving throw.

33-34

A spectral

61-62

67-68

You cast

the next spell you cast in the next minute

31-32

float out of your mouth.

59-60

explode

out from your face.

29-30

you

try, pink bubbles

bursts

13-14

27-28

later.

that isn't being worn or carried

If the

roll is even, you grow.

25-26

1 minute
Whenever

the next 5d6 days.

11-12

23-24

5 feet of you, then disappears

missile.

later.

You castJireball as a 3rd.level

09-10

21-22

in a space

You can't speak for the next minute.

granting

yourself.

19-20

by the DM appears

97-98

within

to piercing

You are surrounded

30 feet of you gain

damage

for the next minute.

by faint, ethereal

next minute.

up to 20 feet as
99-00

You regain ali expended

sorcery

points.

music for the

WARLOCK
With a pseudodragon curled on his shoulder, a young
elf in golden robes smiles warmly, weaving a magical
charm into his honeyed words and bending the palace
sentinel to his will.
As fiames spring to life in her hands, a wizened
human whispers the secret na me of her demonic patron,
infusing her spell with fiendish magic.
Shifting his gaze between a battered tome and the
odd alignment of the stars overhead, a wild-eyed tiefiing
chants the mystic ritual that will open a doorway to a
distant world,
Warlocks are seekers of the knowledge that lies
hidden in the fabric of the multiverse, Through pacts
made with mysterious beings of supernatural power,
warlocks unlock magical effects both subtle and
spectacular. Drawing on the ancient knowledge of
beings such as fey nobles, demons, devils, hags, and
alien entities of the Far Realm, warlocks piece together
arcane secrets to bolster their own power,

SWORN AND BEHOLDEN
A warlock is defined by a pact with an otherworldly
being, Sometimes the relationship between warlock
and patron is like that of a c1erie and a deity, though
the beings that serve as patrons for warlocks are not
gods, A warlock might lead a cult dedicated to a demon
prince, an archdevil, or an utterly alien entity-beings
not typically served by c1erics, More often, though, the
arrangement is similar to that between a master and
an apprentice, The warlock learns and grows in power,
at the cost of occasional services performed on the
patron's behalf.
The magic bestowed on a warlock ranges from minor
but lasting alterations to the warlock's being (such as
the ability to see in darkness or to read any language)
to access to powerful spells, Unlike bookish wizards,
warlocks supplement their magic with some facility
at hand-to-hand combat. They are comfortable in light
armor and know how to use simple weapons,

DELVERS INTO SECRETS
Warlocks are driven by an insatiable need for knowledge
and power, which compels them into their pacts and
shapes their lives, This thirst drives warlocks into their
pacts and shapes their later careers as well.
Stories of warlocks binding themselves to fiends are
widely known, Sut many warlocks serve patrons that
are not fiendish. Sometimes a traveler in the wilds
comes to a strangely beautiful tower, meets its fey lord
or lady, and stumbles into a pact without being fully
aware of it. And sometimes, while poring over tomes of

PART

I I CLASSES

105

Levei

Proficieney
Bonus
+2

Features

1st
2nd

+2

Otherworldly Patron, Paet Magie
Eldriteh Invoeations

3rd
4th

+2
+2

Paet Boon
Ability Seore Improvement

5th

+3

6th
7th
8th

+3
+3

Otherworldly

+3
+4
+4

Ability Seore Improvement

9th
10th
11th
12th

+4
+4

13th
14th
15th
16th
17th
18th

Otherworldly

Patron feature

Patron feature

Mystie Areanum

(6th levei)

Ability Score Improvement
Mystie Areanum (7th levei)
Otherworldly Patron feature
Mystie Areanum (8th levei)
Ability Seore Improvement
Mystie Areanum

(9th levei)

19th
20th

A WARLOCK

As you make your warlock character, spend some time
thinking about your patron and the obligations that
your pact imposes upon you. What led you to make the
pact, and how did you make contact with your patron?
Wcrc you seduced into sumllloning a devi!, or did you
seek out the ritual thal would allow you to make contact
with an alien elder god? Did you search for your patron,
or did your patron find and choose you? Do you chafe
under the obligations of your pact or serve joyfully in
anticipation of the rewards promised to you?
Work with your DM to determine how big a part your
pact will play in your character's adventuring career.

)06

PART I I CLASSES

Spells
Known

2
2
2
3
3

Spell
Slots

Slot
Levei

2

1

1st

3
4

2
2

1st
2nd

5

2
2

2nd

2
2

2
2

3rd
3rd
4th

3
4

2
2

4th
5th

2
3

5th
5th
5th
5th

6
7

3
3
3
3
4

8
9
10
10

4
4

11
11

4
4
4
4

12
12
13
13

4
4
4
4

forbidden lore. a brilliant but crazed student's mind is
opened to realities beyond the material world and to the
alien beings lhat dwell in the outer void.
Once a pact is made, a warlock's thirst for knowledge
and power can't be slaked with mere study and research.
No one makes a pact with such a mighty palron if he or
she doesn't intend to use the power thus gained. Rather,
the vast majority of warlocks spend their days in active
pursuit of their goals. which typically means some kind
of adventuring. Furthermore, the demands of their
patrons drive warlocks toward adventure.

CREATING

Cantrips
Known

3
3
3
3

5th
5th

14
14

3
4
4

5th
5th
5th

15
15

4
4

5th
5th

Invocations

Known
2

3

4
5
5
5
6
6
6
7
7
7
8
8
8

Your patron's demands might drive you into adventures,
or they might consist entirely of small favors you can do
between adventures.
What kind of relationship do you have with your
patron? Is it friendly. antagonistic. uneasy. or romantic?
How important does your patron consider you to be?
What part do you play in your patron's plans? Do you
know other servants of your patron?
How does your patron communicate with you? If
you have a familiar, it might occasionally speak with
your patron's voice. Some warlocks find messages
frolll their patrons etched on trees, mingled among tea
leaves, or adrift in the clouds-messages
that only the
warlock can see. Other warlocks converse with their
patrons in dreams or waking visions, or deal only with
intermediaries.
QUICK

BUILD

Vou can make a warlock quickly by following these
suggestions. First. Charisma should be your highest
ability score, followed by Constitution. Second, choose
the charlatan background. Third. choose the eldritch
blast and chill touch cantrips, along with the 1st-leveI
spells ray of sickness and witch bolt.

CLASS FEATURES
As a warlock, YOll gain the following class features.
HIT

POINTS

Hit Dice: ld8 per warlock levei
Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 8 + your Constitution modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: ld8 (or 5) + your
Constitution 1Il0difier per warlock levei after 1st

PROFICIENCIES

Armor: Lighl armor
Weapons: Simple weapons
Tools: None
Saving Throws: Wisdom, Charisma
Skills: Choose lwo skills from Arcana,
Deceplion, Hislory, !nlimidalion, Invesligalion,
Nalure, and Religion
EQUIPMENT

Vou slarl wilh lhe following equipmenl, in addilion lo
lhe equipmenl granled by your background:
(a) a lighl crossbow and 20 bo!ls or (b) any simple

weapon
(a) a componenl pouch or (b) an arcane focus
(a) a scholar's pack or (b) a dungeoneer's pack
Lealher armor, any simple weapon, and lwo daggers

OTHERWORLDLY PATRON
AI Isllevel, you have slruck a bargain wilh an
olherworldly being of your choice: lhe Archfey, lhe
Fiend, or lhe Greal Old One, each of which is delailed
aI lhe end of lhe class descriplion, Your choice
granls you fealures aI Isllevel and again aI 61h, 101h,
and 141h leveI.

PACT MAGIC
Your arcane research and lhe magic beslowed on you
by your palron have given you facilily wilh spells. See
chapter 10 for lhe general rules of spellcasling and
chapter 11 for lhe warlock spelllisl.
CANTRIPS

Vou know lwo canlrips of your choice from lhe warlock
spelllisl. Vou learn addilional warlock canlrips of your
choice aI higher leveis, as shown in lhe Canlrips Known
column of lhe Warlock lable.

Addilionally, when you gain a levei in this class,
you can choose one of lhe warlock spells you know
and replace il wilh anolher spell from lhe warlock
spelllisl, which also musl be of a leveI for which you
have spell sioIs.
SPELLCASTING ABILITY

Charisma is your spellcasling abilily for your warlock
spells, so you use your Charisma whenever a spell refers
lo your spellcasling abilily. In addition, you use your
Charisma modifier when selling lhe saving lhrow DC
for a warlock spell you casl and when making an allack
roll wilh one.
Spell save De = 8 + your proficiency
your Charisma modifier
Spell altack modifier

= your

your Charisma
SPELLCASTING

proficiency

bonus +

bonus +

modifier

Focus

Vou can use an arcane focus (found in chapler 5) as a
spellcasling focus for your warlock spells.

ELDRITCH

INVOCATIONS

In your sludy of occulllore, you have unearlhed e!drilch
invocalions, fragmenls of forbidden knowledge lhal
imbue you wilh an abiding magical abilily.
AI 2nd levei, you gain lwo eldrilch invocalions of your
choice. Your invocalion oplions are delailed aI lhe end
of lhe class descriplion. When you gain cerlain warlock
leveis, you gain addilional invocalions of your choice,
as shown in lhe lnvocalions Known column of lhe
Warlock lable.
Addilionally, when you gain a levei in lhis class,
you can choose one of lhe invocalions you know and
replace il wilh anolher invocalion lhal you could learn
aI lhal leveI.

PACT BOON
SPELL SLOTS

The Warlock lable shows how many spell slols you have.
The lable also shows whallhe leveI of lhose slols is; ali
of your spell slols are lhe same leveI. To casl one of your
warlock spells of Isllevel or higher, you musl expend a
spell slol. Vou regain ali expended spell slols when you
finish a shorl or long resl.
For example, when you are 51h leveI, you have
lwo 3rd-level spell sioIs. To casllhe Isl-level spell
thunderwave, you musl spend one of lhose sioIs, and
you caSl il as a 3rd-level spell.
SPELLS KNOWN OF 1ST LEVEL AND HIGHER

AI Isllevel, you know lwo Isl-level spells of your choice
from lhe warlock spelllisl.
The Spells Known column of lhe Warlock lable shows
when you learn more warlock spells ofyour choice of ls1
levei and higher. A spell you choose musl be of a levei
no higher lhan whal's shown in lhe lable's Slol LeveI
column for your leveI. When you reach 61h levei, for
example, you learn a new warlock spell, which can be
ISI, 2nd, or 3rd leveI.

AI 3rd levei, your olherworldly palron beslows a gifl
upon you for your loyal service. Vou gain one of lhe
following fealures of your choice.
PACT OF THE CHAIN

Vou learn lhe find familiar spell and can casl il as a
rilual. The spell doesn'l counl againsl your number of
spells known.
When you casllhe spell, you can choose one of lhe
normal forms for your familiar or one of lhe following
special forms: imp, pseudodragon, quasil, or sprile.
Additionally, when you lake lhe Allack aclion, you can
forgo one of your own allacks lo allow your familiar lo
make one allack of ils own.
PACT OF THE BLADE

Vou can use your aclion lo creale a pacl weapon in your
emply hand. Vou can choose lhe form thal this melee
weapon lakes each time you creale il (see chapler 5 for
weapon oplions). Vou are proficienl with il while you
wield il. This weapon counls as magical for lhe purpose
of overcoming resislance and immunily lo nonmagical
allacks and damage.

Your pact weapon disappears if it is more than 5 feet
away from you for 1 minute or more. It also disappears
if you use this feature again. if you dismiss the weapon
(no action required), or if you die,
Vou can transform one magic weapon into your pact
weapon by performing a special ritual while you hold
the weapon. Vou perform the ritual over the course
of 1 hour, which can be done during a short rest.
Vou can then dismiss the weapon, shunting it into an
extradimensional space, and it appears whenever you
create your pact weapon thereafter. Vou can't affect an
artifact or a sentient weapon in this way. The weapon
ceases being your pact weapon if you die, if you perform
the l.hour ritual on a different weapon, or ifyou use
a l.hour ritual to break your bond to it. The weapon
appears at your feet if it is in the extradimensional space
when the bond breaks.
PACT OF THE TOME

Your patron gives you a grimoire called a Book of
Shadows. When you gain this feature, choose three
cantrips from any class's spelllist. While the book is on
your person, you can cast those cantrips at will. They
don't count against your number of cantrips known.
[f you lose your Book of Shadows, you can perform
a l.hour ceremony to receive a replacement from your
patrono This ceremony can be performed during a short
or long rest, and it destroys the previous book. The book
turns to ash when you die.

•••

Each Pacl Boon oplion produces a special crealure or an
objecl thal refiecls your palron's nalure.
Pact ofthe Chain. Your familiar is more cunning than a
typical familiar. Ils defaull form can be a refieclion of your
palron, with spriles and pseudodragons
tied to lhe Archfey
and imps and quasits lied to lhe Fiend. Because lhe Great Old
One's nalure is inscrulable, any familiar form is suitable for il.
Pact afthe 8lade. If your patron is the Archfey, your
weapon mighl be a slender blade wrapped in leafy vines.
If you serve the Fiend, your weapon could be an axe made
of black metal and adorned wilh decorative fiames. If your
palron is lhe Greal Old One, your weapon mighl be an
ancienl.looking
spear, wilh a gemslone embedded
in ils
head, carved to look like a lerrible unblinking eye.
Pact ofthe Tome. Your Book ofShadows
might be a fine,
gíll-edged lome wilh spells of enchanlmenl
and illusion,
gifted lo you by lhe lordly Archfey. It could be a weighty tome
bound in demon hide sludded wilh iron, holding spells of
conjuralion
and a weallh offorbidden
lore aboul lhe sinisler
regions of lhe cosmos, a gíft of lhe Fiend. ar il could be lhe
tattered diary of a lunatic driven mad by conlact wilh the
Greal Old One, holding scraps of spells lhal only your own
burgeoning
insanity allows you lo undersland
and casl.

~

r

OTHERWORLDLY PATRONS

When you reach 4th leveI. and again at 8th, 12th, 16th,
and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability score of your
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.

The beings that serve as patrons for warlocks are
mighty inhabitants of other planes of existence-not
gods, but almost godlike in their power. Various patrons
give their warlocks access to different powers and
invocations, and expect significant favors in returno
Some patrons collect warlocks, doling out mystic
knowledge relatively freely or boasting of their ability
to bind mortaIs to their will. Other patrons bestow their
power only grudgingly, and might make a pact with
only one warlock. Warlocks who serve the same patron
might view each other as allies, siblings, or rivaIs.

MYSTIC ARCANUM

THEARCHFEY

At 11th levei, your patron bestows upon you a magical
secret called an arca num. Choose one 6th-leveI spell
from the warlock spelllist as this arcanum.
Vou can cast your arca num spell once without
expending a spell slot. Vou must finish a long rest before
you can do so again.
At higher leveIs, you gain more warlock spells of your
choice that can be cast in this way: one 7th.level spell
at 13th leveI, one 8th.level spell at 15th levei, and one
9th-leveI spell at 17th leveI. Vou regain all uses of your
Mystic Arcanum when you finish a long rest.

Your patron is a lord or lady of the fey, a creature of
legend who holds secrets that were forgotten before
the mortal races were born. This being's motivations
are often inscrutable, and sometimes whimsical, and
might involve a striving for greater magical power or the
settling of age-old grudges. Beings of this sort include
the Prince of Frost; the Queen of Air and Darkness,
ruler of the Gloaming Court; Titania of the Summer
Court; her consort Oberon, the Green Lord; Hyrsam,
the Prince of Fools; and ancient hags.

ELDRITCH

The Archfey lets you choose from an expanded list of
spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following
spells are added to the warlock spelllist for YOU.

ABILITY

SCORE IMPROVEMENT

EXPANDED

MASTER

At 20th leveI, you can draw on your inner reserve of
mystical power while entreating your patron to regain
expended spell slots. Vou can spend 1 minute entreating
your patron for aid to regain all your expended spell slots
from your Pact Magic feature. Once you regain spell slots
with this feature, you must finish a long rest before you
can do so again.

ARCHFEY
Spell Levei
1 st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th

108

•••

YOUR PACT BOON

PART

I I CLASSES

SPELL LIST

EXPANDED

SPELLS

Spells

faerie fire, sleep
calm emotions, phantosmal force
blink, plont growth
dominate beast, greater invisibility
dominate person, seeming

FEY PRESENCE

EXPANDED

Starting at 1st leveI, your patron bestows upon you the
ability to project the beguiling and fearsome presence
of the fey. As an action, you can cause each creature in
a 10-foot cube originating from you to make a Wisdom
saving throw against your warlock spell save DC. The
creatures that fail their saving throws are ali charmed
or frightened by you (your choice) until the end of
your next turno
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a short or long rest.

The Fiend lets you choose from an expanded list of
spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following
spells are added to the warlock spelllist for YOU.

MISTY ESCAPE

Starting at 6th leveI, you can vanish in a puff of mist in
response to harm. When you take damage, you can use
your reaction to turn invisible and teleport up to 60 feet
to an unoccupied space you can see. Vou remain invisible
until the start of your next turn or until you attack or
cast a spell.
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a short or long rest.
BEGUILING

DEFENSES

Beginning at 10th levei, your patron teaches you how to
turn the mind-affecting magic of your enemies against
them. Vou are immune to being charmed, and when
another creature attempts to charm you, you can use
your reaction to attempt to turn the charm back on
that creature. The creature must succeed on a Wisdom
saving throw against your warlock spell save DC or
be charmed by you for 1 minute or until the creature
takes any damage.
DARK DELIRIUM

Starting at 14th leveI, you can plunge a creature into
an illusory realm. As an action, choose a creature
that you can see within 60 feet of YOU.It must make a
Wisdom saving throw against your warlock spell save
DC. On a failed save, it is charmed or frightened by you
(your choice) for 1 minute or until your concentration
is broken (as if you are concentrating on a spell). This
effect ends early if the creature takes any damage.
Until this illusion ends, the creature thinks it is lost
in a misty realm, the appearance of which you choose.
The creature can see and hear only itself, you, and
the illusion.
Vou must finish a short or long rest before you can
use this feature again.
THE FIEND
Vou have made a pact with a fiend from the lower
planes of existence, a being whose aims are evil,
even if you strive against those aims. Such beings
desire the corruption or destruction of ali things,
ultimately including you. Fiends powerful enough to
forge a pact include demon lords such as Demogorgon,
Orcus, Fraz'Urb-Iuu, and Baphomet; archdevils such
as Asmodeus, Dispater, Mephistopheles, and Belial;
pit fiends and balors that are especially mighty; and
ultroloths and other lords of the yugoloths.

FIEND

SPELL LIST

EXPANDED

Spelllevel
1st
2nd
3rd
4th
5th

SPELlS

Spells

burning hands, command
b/indnessjdeaJness, scorching roy
fireba//, stinking c10ud
fire shield, wa// oJfire
flame strike, ha//ow

DARK ONE'S

BLESSING

Starting at 1st levei, when you reduce a hostile creature
to Ohit points, you gain temporary hit points equal to your
Charisma modifier + your warlock levei (minimum of 1).
DARK ONE'S

OWN LUCK

Starting at 6th leveI, you can call on your patron to alter
fate in your favor. When you make an ability check or a
saving throw, you can use this feature to add a dlO to
your roll. Vou can do so after seeing the initial roll but
before any of the roll's effects occur.
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a short or long rest.
FIENDISH

RESILIENCE

Starting at 10th leveI, you can choose one damage type
when you finish a short or long rest. Vou gain resistance
to that damage type until you choose a different one
with this feature. Damage from magical weapons or
silver weapons ignores this resistance.
HURL THROUGH

HELL

Starting at 14th leveI, when you hit a creature with an
attack, you can use this feature to instantly transport
the target through the lower planes. The creature
disappears and hurtles through a nightmare landscape.
At the end of your next turn, the target returns to the
space it previously occupied, or the nearest unoccupied
space. ]f the target is not a fiend, it takes IOdlO psychic
damage as it reels from its horrific experience.
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a long rest.
THE GREAT OLD ONE
Vour patron is a mysterious entity whose nature is
utterly foreign to the fabric of reality. It might come from
the Far Realm, the space beyond reality, or it could be
one of the elder gods known only in legends. [ts motives
are incomprehensible to mortaIs, and its knowledge so
immense and ancient that even the greatest libraries
pale in comparison to the vast secrets it holds. The
Great Old One might be unaware of your existence
or entirely indifferent to you, but the secrets YOllhave
learned allow YOllto draw YOllrmagic from it.
Entities of this type inclllde Ghallnadar, called That
Which Lllrks; Tharizdun, the Chained God; Dendar, the
Night Serpent; Zargon, the Retllrner; Great Cthlllhll;
and other unfathomable beings.

PART 1

(l

.\SSES

°9

EXPANDED SPELL LIST

ARMOR OF SHADOWS

The Great Old One lets you choose from an expanded list
of spells when you learn a warlock spell. The following
spells are added to the warlock spelllist for you.

Vou can cast mage armor on yourself at will, without
expending a spell slot or material components.
ASCENDANT STEP

GREAT OlO
Spelllevel

ONE EXPANOEO SPEllS

Prerequisite: 9th leveI

Spells

Vou can cast levitate on yourself at will, without
expending a spell slot or material components.

1st

dissonant whispers, Tasha's hideous /aughter

2nd
3rd

detect thoughts, phantasma/

4th
5th

force

elairvoyance, sending
dominate beast, Evard's b/ack tentaeles
dominate

BEAST SPEECH

Vou can cast speak with animaIs at will, without
expending a spell slot.

person, telekine,i,
BEGUILING INFLUENCE

AWAKENED MIND

Starting at 1st levei, your alien knowledge gives you
the ability to touch the minds of other creatures. Vou
can communicate telepathically with any creature you
can see within 30 feet ofyou. Vou don't need to share
a language with the creature for it to understand your
telepathic utterances, but the creature must be able to
understand at least one language.

Vou gain proficiency in the Deception and
Persuasion skills.
BEWITCHING

WHISPERS

Prerequisite: 7th leveI
Vou can cast compulsion once using a warlock spell slot.
Vou can't do so again until you finish a long rest.
BOOK OF ANCIENT

ENTROPIC WARD

At 6th levei, you learn to magically ward yourself against
attack and to turn an enemy's failed strike into good
luck for yourself, When a creature makes an attack
roll against you, you can use your reaction to impose
disadvantage on that roll. ]f the attack misses you, your
next attack roll against the creature has advantage if you
make it before the end of your next turno
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a short or long resto
THOUGHT

SHIELD

Starting at 10th levei, your thoughts can't be read by
telepathy or other means unless you allow it. Vou also
have resistance to psychic damage, and whenever a
creature deals psychic damage to you, that creature
takes the same amount of damage that you do.
CREATE THRALL

At 14th levei, you gain the ability to infect a humanoid's
mind with the alien magic of your patrono Vou can use
your action to touch an incapacitated humanoid. That
creature is then charmed by you until a remove curse
spell is cast on it, the charmed condition is removed
from it, or you use this feature again.
Vou can communicate telepathically with the charmed
creature as long as the two Dfyou are on the same plane
Dfexistence.

ELDRITCH

INVOCATIONS

If an eldritch invocation has prerequisites, you must
meet them to learn it. Vou can learn the invocation at the
same time that you meet its prerequisites.
AGONIZING

BLAST

Prerequisite: eldritch blast cantrip
When you cast eldritch blast, add your Charisma
modifier to the damage it deals on a hit.

110

I'ART 1 I CLASSES

SECRETS

Prerequisite: Pact of the Tome feature
Vou can now inscribe magical rituais in your Book of
Shadows. Choose two 1st-leveI spells that have the
ritual tag fram any c1ass's spelllist. The spells appear
in the book and don't count against the number of spells
you know. With your Book of Shadows in hand, you
can cast the chosen spells as rituais. Vou can't cast the
spells except as rituais, unless you've learned them by
some other means. Vou can also cast a warlock spell
you know as a ritual if it has the ritual tag.
On your adventures, you can add other ritual spells to
your Book of Shadows. When you find such a spell, you
can add it to the book if the spell's levei is equal to or
less than half your warlock leveI (rounded up) and if you
can spare the time to transcribe the spell. For each levei
of the spell, the transcription process takes 2 hours and
costs 50 gp for the rare inks needed to inscribe it.
CHAINS OF CARCERI

Prerequisite: 15th leveI, Pactofthe

Chain feature

Vou can cast hold monster at will-targeting a celestial,
fiend, or elemental-without
expending a spell slot or
material components. Vou must finish a long rest before
you can use this invocation on the same creature again.
DEVIL'S SIGHT

Vou can see normally in darkness, both magical and
nonmagical, to a distance Df 120 feet.
DREADFUL WORD

Prerequisite: 7th leveI
Vou can cast confusion once using a warlock spell slol.
Vou can't do so again until you finish a long rest.
ELDRITCH SIGHT

Vou can cast detect magic at will, without expending
a spell slot.

ELDRITCH

SPEAR

OTHERWORLDLY LEAP

Prerequisite: eldritch blast cantrip

Prerequisite: 9th leveI

When you cast eldritch blast, its range is 300 feel.

Vou can castjump on yourself at \ViII,\Vithout expending
a spell slot or material components.

EYES OF THE RUNE KEEPER

VOUcan read ali writing.

REPELLING

BLAST

Prerequisite: eldritch blast cantrip
FIENDISH VIGOR

VOUcan cast false /ife on yourself at will as a
1st-levei spell, without expending a spell slot or
material components.
GAZE OF Two

MINDS

VOUcan use your action to touch a willing humanoid
and perceive through its senses until the end ofyour
next turno As long as the creature is on the same
plane of existence as you, you can use your action
on subsequent turos to maintain this connection,
extending the duration until the end of your next turno
While perceiving through the other creature's senses,
you benefit from any special senses possessed by that
creature, and you are blinded and deafened to your own
surroundings.

When you hit a creature with eldritch blast. you can push
the creature up to 10 feet away from you in a straight line.
SCULPTOR OF FLESH

Prerequisite: 7th leveI
Vou can cast polymorph once using a warIock spell slol.
Vou can't do so again until you finish a long resl.
SIGN OF ILL OMEN

Prerequisite: 5th leveI
Vou can cast bestow curse once using a warIock spell
slol. Vou can't do so again until you finish a long resl.
THIEF OF FIVE FATES

VOUcan cast bane once using a warIock spell slot. Vou
can't do so again until YOII finish a long resl.

LIFEDRIN KER

Prerequisite: 12th leveI, Pact of lhe 81ade fcature

THIRSTING

BLADE

Prerequisite: 5th leveI, Pact of the 81ade feature

When you hit a creature with your pact weapon, the
creature takes extra necrotic damage equal to your
Charisma modifier (minimum 1).

Vou can attack with your pact weapon t\Vice. instead of
once, whenever you take the Attack action on your tllrn.

MASK OF MANY FACES

VISIONS OF DISTANT REALMS

VOUcan cast disguise self at will, without expending
a spell slol.

Prerequisite: 15th levei

MASTER OF MYRIAD FORMS

Vou can cast arcane eye at wilI, without expending
a spell slot.

Prerequisile: 15th leveI

VOICE OF THE CHAIN

Vou can cast alter self at will, without expending
a spell slol.

Prerequisite: Pact ofthe Chain feature

MINIONS

OF CHAOS

Prerequisite: 9th leveI
Vou can cast conjure elemenlal once using a
warIock spell slol. Vou can't do so again until you
finish a long resl.

MASTER

Vou can communicate teIepathically with your familiar
and perceive through your familiar's senses as long as
you are on the same plane of existence. Additionally,
while perceiving through your familiar's senses, you can
also speak through your familiar in your own voice, evcn
if your familiar is normally incapable of speech.
WHISPERS OF THE GRAVE

MIRE THE MIND

Prerequisite: 5th leveI
Vou can cast slow once using a warIock spell slol. Vou
can't do so again until you finish a long resl.

Prerequisite: 9th levei
Vou can cast speak with dead at wilI, without expending
a spell slot.
WITCH SIGHT

MISTY VISIONS

VOUcan cast silenl image at wilI, without expending a
spell slot or material components.
ONE WITH SHADOWS

Prerequisite: 5th leveI

Prerequisite: 15th leveI
Vou can see the true form of any shapechanger or
creature concealed by illusion or transmutation magic
while the creature is within 30 feet of you and within
line of sighl.

When you are in an area of dim light or darkness, you
can use your action to become invisible until you move
ar take ao acHa0 ar a reaction.

PARf 1

(l

SE

WIZARD
Clad in the silver robes that denote her station, an
elf closes her eyes to shut out the distractions of the
battletield and begins her quiet chant. Fingers weaving
in front of her, she completes her spell and launches a
tiny bead of tire toward the enemy ranks, where it erupts
into a confiagration that engulfs the soldiers.
Checking and rechecking his work, a human scribes
an intricate magic circle in chalk on the bare stone
fioor, then sprinkles powdered iron along every line and
graceful curve. When the circle is complete, he drones a
long incantation. A hole opens in space inside the circle,
bringing a whiff of brimstone from the otherworldly
plane beyond.
Crouching on the fioor in a dungeon intersection, a
gnome tosses a handful of small bones inscribed with
mystic symbols, muttering a few words of power over
them. Closing his eyes to see the visions more clearly,
he nods slowly, then opens his eyes and points down the
passage to his left.
Wizards are supreme magic-users, detined and united
as a class by the spells they cast. Drawing on the subtle
weave of magic that permeates the cosmos, wizards cast
spel1s of explosive tire, arcing lightning, subtle deception,
and brute.force mind control. Their magic conjures
monsters from other planes of existence, glimpses the
future, or turns slain foes into zombies. Their mightiest
spel1s change one substance into another, cal1 meteors
down from the sky, or open portaIs to other worlds.

SCHOLARS

OF THE ARCANE

Wild and enigmatic, varied in form and function, the
power of magic draws students who seek to master
its mysteries. Some aspire to become like the gods,
shaping reality itself. Though the casting of a typical
spel1 requires merely the utterance of a few strange
words, fieeting gestures, and sometimes a pinch or
clump of exotic materiaIs, these surface components
barely hint at the expertise attained after years of
apprenticeship and countless haurs of study.
Wizards live and die by their spel1s. Everything else
is secondary. They learn new spel1s as they experiment
and grow in experience. They can also learn them fram
other wizards, from ancient tomes or inscriptions,
and from ancient creatures (such as the fey) that are
steeped in magic.

112

PART 1 I CLASSES

~

Preficiency
Levei

Bonus

1st

+2
+2
+2

2nd
3rd
4th
5th
6th
7th
8th

•..

9th
10th
11th
12th
13th
14th
15th

-Spells

Cantrips
Known

1st

2nd

Spelleasting, Areane Reeevery
Areane Traditien

3
3
3

2
3
4

2

+2
+3
+3
+3

Ability Score Improvement

4
4

4

+3
+4
+4

Ability Seere Improvement

4

Areane Traditien feature

+4
+4

4
5
5

Ability Seere Improvement

Features

Areane Traditien feature

+5

4
4

5
5

4
4
4
4
4
4
4
4

3

2
2

1
1

1
1
1

4

3

3

2

1

1

3
3

3
3

3
3

3

1

3

1
2

3

3

3

3

2

2

19th

5

20th

+6

Signature Spell

5

4

Creating a wizard character demands a backstory
dominated by at least one extraordinary
event. How
did your character first come into contact with magic?
How did you discover you had an aptitude for it? Do
you have a natural talent, or did you simply study
hard and practice incessantly?
Did you encounter a
magical creature or an ancient tome that taught you the
basics of magic?
What drew you forth from your life of study? Did your
first taste of magical knowledge leave you hungry for
more? Have you received word of a secret repository
of knowledge not yet plundered by any other wizard?
Perhaps you're simply eager to put your newfound
magical skills to the test in the face of danger.

3
3
3

2

3
3

4
4

A WIZARD

3
3
3

1

3
3

5

CREATING

3
3
3

3
3
3

Spell Mastery
Ability Seore Improvement

9th

3
3
3
3
3

3

4
4

8th

2

1
1
1

+6
+6

Wizards' lives are seldom mundane, The dosest a
wizard is likely to come to an ordinary life is working
as a sage or lecturer in a library or university, teaching
others the secrets of the multiverse. Other wizards sell
their services as diviners, serve in military forces, or
pursue lives of crime or domination.
But the lure of knowledge and power calls even the
most unadventurous
wizards out of the safety of their
libraries and laboratories
and into crumbling ruins and
lost cities. Most wizards believe that their counterparts
in ancient civilizations knew secrets of magic that have
been lost to the ages, and discovering those secrets
could unlock the path to a power greater than any magic
available in the present age.

7th

2
2

5
5

THE LURE OF KNOWLEDGE

6th

3
3

4
4

Ability Seore Improvement

18th

5th

1
2
2
2

Areane Tradition feature

16th
17th

3
3

Slets per Spell Level4th

3
3
3
3

+5
+5
+5
+6

5
5

3
3

3rd

1
1

1

QUICK BUILD
Vou can make a wizard quickly by following these
suggestions.
First, Intelligence should be your highest
ability score, followed by Constitution
or Dexterity.
If you plan to join the School of Enchantment,
make
Charisma your next-best score. Second, choose the sage
background.
Third, choose the mage hand, light, and
ray af frost cantrips, alang with the fallowing 1st-leveI
spells for your spellboak: burning hands, eharm persan,
feather fali, mage armar. magie missi/e, and s/eep.

CLASS FEATURES
As a wizard,

yau gain the follawing

dass

features.

HIT POINTS
Hit Dice: 1d6 per wizard leveI
Hit Points at 1st LeveI: 6 + your Canstitutian
modifier
Hit Points at Higher LeveIs: 1d6 (or 4) + your
Constitution
modifier per wizard leveI after 1st
PROFICIENCIES
Armor: None
Weapons: Daggers,
light crossbows
Tools: None

darts, slings, quarterstaffs.

Saving Throws: Intelligenee, Wisdom
Skills: Choose two from Areana, History,
Investigation,
Medicine, and Religion

Insight,

PART I

CLASSES
113

EQUIPMENT

SPELLBOOK

Vou start with the following equipment, in addition to
the equipment granted by your baekground:

At 1st leveI. you have a spellbook eontaining six 1st-levei
wizard spells of your ehoice.

(a) a quarterstaff or (b) a dagger
(a) a eomponent poueh or (b) an areane foeus
(a) a seholar's paek or (b) an explorer's paek

PREPARING

A spellbook

SPELLCASTING
As a student of areane magic, you have a spellbook
eontaining spells that show the first glimmerings of
your true power, See ehapter 10 for the general rules of
spelleasting and ehapter 11 for the wizard spelllist.
CANTRIPS

At 1st leveI, you know three eantrips of your ehoice
from the wizard spelllist. Vou learn additional wizard
eantrips ofyour ehoice at higher leveIs, as shown in the
Cantrips Known eolumn of the Wizard table,
4
YOUR

•
SPELLBOOK

The spells that Vou add to your spellbook as Vou gain leveis
refiect the arcane research Vou conduct on your own, as well
as intellectual breakthroughs Vou have had about the nature
ofthe multiverse. You might find other spells during your
adventures. You could discover a spell recorded on a scroll in
an evil wizard's chest, for example, or in a dusty tome in an
ancient library.
Copy;ng a Spell ;nlo lhe Book. When Vou find a wizard spell
of 1st levei or higher, Vou can add it to your spellbook if it is
of a levei for which Vou have spell slots and if Vou can spare
the time to decipher and copy il.
Copying a spell into your spellbook involves reproducing
the basic form of the spell, then deciphering the unique
system of notation used by the wizard who wrote il. You
must practice the spell until Vou understand the sounds
or gestures required, then transcribe it into your spellbook

SPELLCASTING

For each levei of the spell, the process takes 2 hours and
costs 50 gp. The cost represents material components Vou
expend as Vou experiment with the spell to master it, as well
as the fine inks Vou need to record il. Once Vou have spent
this time and money, Vou can prepare the spell just like your
other spells.
Replacing lhe Book. You can copy a spell from your own
spellbook into another book-for example, if Vou want
to make a backup copy of your spellbook. This is just like
copying a new spell into your spellbook, but faster and easier,
since Vou understand your own notation and already know
how to cast the spell. You need spend only 1 hour and 10 gp
for each levei of the copied spell.
If Vou lose your spellbook, Vou can use the same procedure
to transcribe the spells that Vou have prepared into a new
spellbook. Filling out the remainder of your spellbook
requires Vou to find new spells to do so, as normal. For this
reason, many wizards keep backup spellbooks in a safe place.
The Book's Appea,ance. Your spellbook is a unique

PART I
111-

I CLASSES

ABILITY

Spell save De = 8 + your proficiency
your Intelligence modifier
Spell attack modifier

= your

your Intelligence

bonus +

proficiency bonus +
modifier

RITUAL CASTING

Vou ean east a wizard spell as a ritual if that spell has
the ritual tag and you have the spell in your spellbook.
Vou don't need to have the spell prepared.
SPELLCASTING

Focus

Vou ean use an areane foeus (found in ehapler 5) as a
spelleasting foeus for your wizard spells.
LEARNING

SPELLS OF 1sT LEVEL ANO HIGHER

Eaeh time you gain a wizard leveI, you ean add two
wizard spells of your ehoiee to your spellbook. Eaeh
of these spells must be of a leveI for whieh you have
spell slots, as shown on lhe Wizard table. On your
advenlures, you might find other spells lhat you ean add
to your spellbook (see the "Your Spellbook" sidebar).

compilation af spells, with its own decorative f10urishes and

••

SPELLS

lntelligenee is your spelleasting abilily for your wizard
spells, sinee you learn your spells through dedieated
study and memorization. Vou use your Intelligenee
whenever a spell refers to your spel1casting ability.
In addition, you use your Inlelligenee modifier when
setting the saving throw DC for a wizard spell you east
and when making an attaek roll with one.

using your own notation.

margin notes. It might be a plain, functionalleather
volume
that Vou received as a gift from your master, a finely bound
gilt-edged tome Vou found in an ancient library, or even a
loose collection of notes scrounged together afler Vou lost
your previous spellbook in a mishap.

ANO CASTING

The Wizard lable shows how many spell slots you have
to east your spells of 1st leveI and higher. To east one of
these spells, you must expend a slol of the spelJ's leveI
or higher. Vou regain ali expended spell slots when you
finish a long rest.
Vou prepare the Iist of wizard spells that are available
for you to east. To do so, ehoose a number of wizard
spells from your spellbook equal to your Intelligenee
modifier + your wizard leveI (minimum of one spell). The
spells must be of a leveI for whieh you have spell slots.
For example, if you're a 3rd-level wizard, you have
four 1st-leve! and two 2nd-levei spell slots. With an
lntelligenee of 16, your list of prepared spells ean
include six spells of 1st or 2nd leveI, in any eombination,
ehosen from your spellbook. If you prepare the 1st-levei
spell magie missiJe, you ean east it using a 1st-Ievel or a
2nd-levei slot. Casting lhe spell doesn't remove it from
your Iist of prepared spells.
Vou ean ehange your list of prepared spells when
you finish a long rest. Preparing a new list of wizard
spells requires time spent studying your spellbook and
memorizing the ineantations and gestures you must
make to east the spell: aI least 1 minute per spelllevel
for eaeh spell on your Iist.

••

ARCANE

RECOVERY

Vou have learned to regain some of your magical energy
by studying your spellbook. Once per day when you
finish a short rest, you can choose expended spell slots
to recover. The spell slots can have a combined leveI that
is equal to or less than half your wizard leveI (rounded
up), and none of the slots can be 6th leveI or higher.
For example, ifyou're a 4th-leveI wizard, you can recover
up to two leveIs worth of spell slots. Vou can recover either
a 2nd-leveI spell slot or two 1st-levei spell slots.

ARCANE TRADITION
When you reach 2nd levei, you choose an arcane
tradition, shaping your practice of magic through one
of eight schools: Abjuration, Conjuration, Oivination,
Enchantment, Evocation, lllusion, Necromancy,
or Transmutation, ali detailed at the end of the
class description.
Your choice grants you features at 2nd leveI and again
at 6th, 10th, and 14th leveI.

ABILITY

SCORE IMPROVEMENT

When you reach 4th levei, and again at 8th, 12th. 16th,
and 19th leveI, you can increase one ability score of your
choice by 2, or you can increase two ability scores of
your choice by 1. As normal, you can't increase an ability
score above 20 using this feature.

SPELL MASTERY
At 18th leveI, you have achieved such mastery over
certain spells that you can cast them at will. Choose a
1st-levei wizard spell and a 2nd.level wizard spell that
are in your spellbook. Vou can cast those spells at their
lowest leveI without expending a spell slot when you
have them prepared. 1£you want to cast either spell at a
higher leveI, you must expend a spell slot as normal.
By spending 8 hours in study, you can exchange one
or both of the spells you chose for different spells of
the same leveIs.

SIGNATURE

SPELLS

When you reach 20th levei, you gain mastery over two
powerful spells and can cast them with little effort.
Choose two 3rd.level wizard spells in your spellbook
as your signature spells. Vou always have these spells
prepared, they don't count against the number of spells
you have prepared, and you can cast each of them once at
3rd leveI without expending a spell slot. When you do so,
you can't do so again until you finish a short or long rest.
1£you want to cast either spell at a higher leveI, you
must expend a spell slot as normal.

ARCANE TRADITIONS
The study of wizardry is ancient, stretching back to
the earliest mortal discoveries of magic. It is firmly
established in the worlds of 0&0, with various
traditions dedicated to its complex study.
The most common arcane traditions in the multiverse
revolve around the schools of magic. Wizards through

the ages have cataloged thousands of spells, grouping
them into eight categories called schools, as described
in chapter 10. In some places, these traditions are
literally schools; a wizard might study at the School of
lllusion while another studies across town at the School
of Enchantment. In other institutions, the schools are
more like academic departments, with rival faculties
competing for students and funding. Even wizards who
train apprentices in the solitude of their own towers use
the division of magic into schools as a learning device,
since the spells of each school require mastery of
different techniques.

SCHOOL OF ABJURATION
The School of Abjuration emphasizes magic that blocks,
banishes, or protects. Oetractors of this school say
that its tradition is about denial, negation rather than
positive assertion. Vou understand, however, that ending
harmful effects, protecting the weak, and banishing evil
influences is anything but a philosophical void. It is a
proud and respected vocation.
Called abjurers, members of this school are sought
when baleful spirits require exorcism, when important
locations must be guarded against magical spying, and
when portaIs to other planes of existence must be closed.
ABJURATION

SAVANT

Beginning when you select this school at 2nd leveI, the
gold and time you must spend to copy an abjuration
spell into your spellbook is halved.
ARCANE

WARD

Starting at 2nd levei, you can weave magic around
yourself for protection. When you cast an abjuration
spell of Ist leveI or higher, you can simultaneously use a
strand of the spell's magic to create a magical ward on
yourself that lasts until you finish a long rest. The ward
has hit points equal to twice your wizard leveI + your
Intelligence modifier. Whenever you take damage, the
ward takes the damage instead. lf this damage reduces
the ward to O hit points, you take any remaining damage.
While the ward has O hit points, it can't absorb
damage, but its magic remains. Whenever you cast an
abjuration spell of 1st leveI or higher, the ward regains a
number of hit points equal to twice the leveI of the spell.
Once you create the ward, you can't create it again
until you finish a long resto
PROJECTED WARD

Starting at 6th leveI. when a creature that you can see
within 30 feet of you takes damage, you can use your
reaction to cause your Arcane Ward to absorb that
damage. If this damage reduces the ward to O hit points,
the warded creature takes any remaining damage.
IMPROVED

ABJURATION

Beginning at 10th leveI, when you cast an abjuration
spell that requires you to make an ability check as
a part of casting that spell (as in counterspell and
dispel magic), you add your proficiency bonus to lhat
ability check.

PARl

I

(I

<\SSfS
li

object that you have seen. The object is visibly magical,
radiating dim light out to 5 fee!.
The object disappears after 1 hour, when you use this
feature again, or if it takes any damage.
BENIGN TRANSPOSITION

Starting at 6th leveI, you can use your action to teleport
up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space that you can see.
Alternatively, you can choose a space within range
that is occupied by a Small or Medium creature. ]f that
creature is willing, you both teleport, swapping places.
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until
you finish a long rest or you cast a conjuration spell of
1st levei or higher.
FOCUSED CONJURATION

Beginning at 10th leveI, while you are concentrating on
a conjuration spell, your concentration can't be broken
as a result of taking damage.
DURABLE SUMMONS

Starting at 14th leveI, any creature that you
summon or create with a conjuration spell has 30
temporary hit points.

SCHOOL OF DIVINATION
The counsel of a diviner is sought by royalty and
commoners alike, for ali seek a clearer understanding
of the past, present, and future. As a diviner, you strive
to part the veils of space, time, and consciousness so
that you can see clearly. Vou work to master spells of
discernment, remote viewing, supernatural knowledge,
and foresight.
DIVINATION
SPELL RESISTANCE

Starting at 14th leveI, you have advantage on saving
throws against spells.
Furthermore, you have resistance against the
damage of spells.

SCHOOL OF CONJURATION
As a conjurer, you favor spells that produce objects
and creatures out of thin air. Vou can conjure billowing
clouds of killing fog or summon creatures from
elsewhere to fight on your behalf. As your mastery
grows, you learn spells of transportation and can
teleport yourself across vast distances, even to other
planes of existence, in an instan!.
CONJURATION

SAVANT

Beginning when you select this school at 2nd leveI, the
gold and time you must spend to copy a conjuration spell
into your spellbook is halved.
MINOR CONJURATION

Starting at 2nd leveI when you select this school, you
can use your action to conjure up an inanimate object
in your hand or on the ground in an unoccupied space
that you can see within 10 feet of you. This object can be
no larger than 3 feet on a side and weigh no more than
10 pounds, and its form must be that of a nonmagical
PART I I CLASSES
116

SAVANT

Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei, the
gold and time you must spend to copy a divination spell
into your spellbook is halved.
PORTENT

Starting at 2nd levei when you choose this school,
glimpses of the future begin to press in on your
awareness. When you finish a long rest, roll two d20s
and record the numbers rolled. Vou can replace any
attack roll, saving throw, or ability check made by you or
a creature that you can see with one of these foretelling
rolls. Vou must choose to do so before the roll, and you
can replace a roll in this way only once per turno
Each foretelling roll can be used only once. When you
finish a long rest, you lose any unused foretelling rolls.
EXPERT DIVINATION

Beginning at 6th leveI, casting divination spells comes
so easily to you that it expends only a fraction of your
spellcasting efforts. When you cast a divination spell
of 2nd leveI or higher using a spell slot, you regain one
expended spell slo!. The slot you regain must be of a
levellower than the spell you cast and can't be higher
than 5th leveI.
THE THIRD

EYE

Starting at 10th levei, you can use your action to
increase your powers of perception. When you do so,

On a successful save, you can't use this feature on the
attacker again until you finish a long rest.
Vou must choose to use this feature before knowing
whether the attack hits or misses. Creatures that can't
be charmed are immune to this effect.

choose one of the following benefits, which lasts until
you are incapacitated or you take a short or long rest.
Vou can't use the feature again until you finish a rest.
Darkvision. Vou gain darkvision out to a range of 60
feet, as described in chapter 8.
Ethereal Si{jht. Vou can see into the Ethereal Plane
within 60 feet of you.
Greater Comprehension. Vou can read any language.
See Invisibility. Vou can see invisible creatures and
objects within 10 feet of you that are within line of sight.

Starting at 10th levei, when you cast an enchantment
spell of 1st levei or higher that targets only one creature,
you can have it target a second creature.

GREATER PORTENT

ALTER MEMORIES

Starting at 14th levei, the visions in your dreams
intensify and paint a more accurate picture in your mind
of what is to come. Vou roll three d20s for your Portent
feature, rather than two.

At 14th levei, you gain the ability to make a creature
unaware of your magical influence on it. When you cast
an enchantment spell to charm one or more creatures,
you can alter one creature's understanding so that it
remains unaware of being charmed.
Additionally, once before the spell expires, you can
use your action lOtry to make the chosen creature
forget some of the time it spent charmed. The creature
must succeed on an Intelligence saving throw against
your wizard spell save DC or lose a number of hours
of its memories equal to 1 + your Charisma modifier
(minimum 1). Vou can make the creature forget less
time, and the amount of time can't exceed thc duration
of your enchantment spell.

SCHOOLOFENCHANTMENT
As a member of the School of Enchantment, you have
honed your ability to magically entrance and beguile
other people and monsters. Some enchanters are
peacemakers who bewitch the violent to lay down their
arms and charm the cruel into showing mercy. Others
are tyrants who magically bind the unwilling into their
service. Most enchanters fall somewhere in between.
ENCHANTMENT

SAVANT

Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei, the
gold and time you must spend to copy an enchantment
spell into your spellbook is halved.
HYPNOTIC

GAZE

Starting at 2nd levei when you choose this school, your
soft words and enchanting gaze can magically enthrall
another creature. As an action, choose one creature that
you can see within 5 feet of you. ]f the target can see or
hear you, it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw
against your wizard spell save DC or be charmed by you
until the end of your next turno The charmed creature's
speed drops to O, and the creature is incapacitated and
visibly dazed.
On subsequent turns, you can use your action to
maintain this effect, extending its duration until the
end of your next turno However, the effect ends if you
move more than 5 feet away from the creature, if the
creature can neither see nor hear you, or if the creature
takes damage.
Once the effect ends, or if the creature succeeds on its
initial saving throw against this effect, you can't use this
feature on that creature again until you finish a long rest.
INSTINCTIVE

SPLIT ENCHANTMENT

SCHOOL OF EVOCATION
Vou focus your study on magic that creates powerful
elemental effects sue h as bitter cold, searing flame,
rolling thunder, crackling lightning, and burning acid.
Some evokers find employment in military forces,
serving as artillery to blast enemy armies from afar.
Others use their spectacular power to protect the weak,
while some seek their own gain as bandits, adventurers,
or aspiring tyrants.
EVOCATION SAVANT

Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei, the
gold and time you must spend to copy an evocation spell
into your spellbook is halved.
SCULPT SPELLS

Beginning at 2nd levei, you can create pockets of
reIative safety within the effects of your evocation spclls.
When you cast an evocation spell that affects other
creatures that you can see, you can choose a number
of them equal to 1 + the spell's leveI. The chosen
creatures automatically succeed on their saving throws
against the spell, and they take no damage if they would
normally take half damage on a successful save.

CHARM

Beginning at 6th levei, when a creature you can see
within 30 feet of you makes an attack roll against
you, you can use your reaction to divert the attack,
provided that another creature is within the attack's
range. The attacker must make a Wisdom saving throw
against your wizard spell save De. On a failed save,
the attacker must target the creature that is dosest
lo il, not including you or itself. If multiple creatures
are dosest, lhe attacker chooses which one to target.

POTENT

CANTRIP

Starting at 6th levei, your damaging cantrips affect
even creatures that avoid the brunt of the effect. When
a creature succeeds on a saving throw against your
cantrip, the creature takes half the cantrip's damage (if
any) but suffers no additional effect from the cantrip.
EMPOWERED

EVOCATION

Beginning at 10th leveI, you can add your Intelligence
modifier to the damage roll of any wizard evocation
spell you cast.
PART I I CI ASSES
lI'

OVERCHANNEL

Starting at 14th levei, you can increase the power of
your simpler spells. When you cast a wizard spell of
5th levei ar lower that deals damage, you can deal
maximum damage with that spell.
The first time you do so, you suffer no adverse effect.
If you use this feature again before you finish a long
rest, you take 2d 12 necrotic damage for each levei of
the spell, immediately after you cast it. Each time you
use this feature again before finishing a long rest, the
necrotic damage per spelllevel increases by ldl2. This
damage ignores resistance and immunity.

SCHOOL OF ILLUSION
Vou focus your studies on magic that dazzles the
senses, befuddles the mind, and tricks even the wisest
folk. Your magic is subtle, but the ilIusions crafted by
your keen mind make the impossible seem real. Some
illusionists-including
many gnome wizards-are
benign tricksters who use their spells to entertain.
Others are more sinister masters of deception, using
their ilIusions to frighten and fool others for their
personal gain.
ILLUSION

SAVANT

Beginning when you se1ect this school at 2nd levei, the
gold and time you must spend to copy an illusion spell
into your spellbook is halved.
IMPROVED

MINOR

ILLUSION

When you choose this school at 2nd levei, you learn
the minor illusion cantrip. lf you already know this
cantrip, you learn a different wizard cantrip of your

choice. The cantrip doesn't count against your number
of cantrips known.
When you cast minar illusian, yau can create bath a
saund and an image with a single casting of the spell.
MALLEABLE

ILLUSIONS

Starting at 6th levei, when you cast an illusion spell that
has a duration of 1 minute or longer, you can use yaur
action to change the nature of that illusion (using the
spell's normal parameters for lhe illusion), provided that
you can see the illusion.
ILLUSORY SELF

Beginning at 10th levei, you can create an illusory
duplicate of yourself as an instant, almost instinctual
reaction to danger. When a creature makes an attack
roll against you, you can use your reaction to interpose
the illusory duplicate between the attacker and
yourself. The attack automatically misses you, then the
ilIusion dissipates.
Once you use this feature, you can't use it again untU
you finish a short ar long rest.
ILLUSORY REALITY

By 14th levei, you have learned the secret ofweaving
shadow magic into your illusions to give them a semireality. When you cast an illusion spell of 1st levei or
higher, you can choose one inanimate, nonmagical
object that is part of the illusion and make that object
real. Vou can do this on your turn as a bonus action
while the spell is ongoing. The object remains real for
I minute. For example, you can create an illusion of a
bridge over a chasm and then make it reallong enough
for your allies to cross.
The object can't deal damage or otherwise
directly harm anyone.

SCHOOL OF NECROMANCY
The School of Necromancy explores the cosmic forces
of life, death, and undeath. As you focus your studies in
this tradition, you learn to manipulate the energy that
animates allliving things. As you progress, you learn to
sap the life force fram a creature as your magic destrays
its bady, transforming that vital energy into magical
power you can manipulate.
Most people see necramancers as menacing, or even
villainous, due to the dose association with death.
Not all necramancers are evil, but the forces they
manipulate are considered taboo by many societies.
NECROMANCY

SAVANT

Beginning when you se1ect this school at 2nd levei, the
gold and time you must spend to copy a necromancy
spell into your spellbook is halved.
GRIM

HARVEST

At 2nd levei, you gain the ability to reap life energy from
creatures you kill with your spells. Once per turn when
you kill one ar more creatures with a spell of 1st levei
or higher, yau regain hit points equal to twice the spell's
levei, or three times its level if the spell belongs to the
School of Necramancy. Vou don't gain this benefit for
killing constructs or undead.
PART
118

1 I CLASSES

UNDEAD THRALLS

At 6th levei, you add the animate dead spell to your
spellbook if it is not there already, When you cast
animate dead, you can target one additional corpse
or pile of bones, creating another zombie or ske1eton,
as appropriate,
Whenever you create an undead using a necromancy
spell, it has additional benefits:
The creature's hit point maximum is increased byan
amount equal to your wizard leveI.
The creature adds your proficiency bonus to its
weapon damage rolls,
INURED TO UNDEATH

Beginning at 10th levei, you have resistance to necrotic
damage, and your hit point maximum can't be reduced.
Vou have spent so much time dealing with undead and
the forces that animate them that you have become
inured to some of their worst effects.
COMMAND

UNDEAD

Starting at 14th levei, you can use magic to bring
undead under your control, even those created by other
wizards. As an action, you can choose one undead that
you can see within 60 feet of you. That creature must
make a Charisma saving throw against your wizard
spell save DC. If it succeeds, you can't use this feature
on it again. If it fails, it becomes friendly to you and
obeys your commands until you use this feature again.
Intelligent undead are harder to control in this way.
If the target has an Intelligence of 8 or higher, it has
advantage on the saving throw. If it fails the saving
throw and has an Intelligence of 12 or higher, it can
repeat the saving throw at the end of every hour until it
succeeds and breaks free.

SCHOOL OF TRANSMUTATION
Vou are a student of spells that modify energy and matler.
To you, the world is not a fixed thing, but eminently
mutable, and you delight in being an agent of change.
Vou wield the raw stuff of creation and learn to alter both
physical forms and mental qualities. Your magic gives
you the tools to become a smith on reality's forge.
Some transmuters are tinkerers and pranksters,
turning people into toads and transforming copper into
silver for fun and occasional profit. Others pursue their
magical studies with deadly seriousness, seeking the
power of the gods to make and destroy worlds.
TRANSMUTATION

SAVANT

Beginning when you select this school at 2nd levei, the
gold and time you must spend to copy a transmutation
spell into your spellbook is halved.
MINaR

ALCHEMY

Starting at 2nd levei when you select this school, you
can temporarily alter the physical properties of one
nonmagical object, changing it from one substance into
another. Vou perform a special alchemical procedure
on one object composed entire1y of wood, stone (but not
a gemstone), iron, copper, or silver, transforming it into
a different one of those materiais. For each 10 minutes

you spend performing the procedure, you can transform
up to I cubic foot of material. After 1 hour, or until you
lose your concentration (as if you were concentrating on
a spell), the material reverts to its original substance.
TRANSMUTER'S

STONE

Starting at 6th levei, you can spend 8 hours creating a
transmuter's stone that stores transmutation magic. Vou
can benefit from the stone yourself or give it to another
creature. A creature gains a benefit of your choice
as long as the stone is in the creature's possession.
When you create the stone, choose the benefit from the
following options:
Darkvision out to a range of 60 feet, as described in
chapter 8
An increase to speed of lO feet while the creature is
unencumbered
Proficiency in Constitution saving throws
Resistance to acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder
damage (your choice whenever you choose this
benefit)
Each time you cast a transmutation spell of Ist levei
or higher, you can change the effect of your stone if the
stone is on your person.
If you create a new transmuter's stone, the previous
one ceases to function.
SHAPECHANGER

At 10th levei, you add the polymorph spell to your
spellbook, if it is not there already. Vou can cast
polymorph without expending a spell slot. When you
do so, you can target only yourself and transform into a
beast whose challenge rating is 1 or lower.
Once you cast polymorph in this way, you can't do so
again until you finish a short or long rest, though you
can still cast it normally using an available spell slot.
MASTER TRANSMUTER

Starting at 14th levei, you can use your action to
consume the reserve of transmutation magic slored
within your transmuter's stone in a single burst. When
you do so, choose one of the following effects. Your
transmuter's stone is destroyed and can'l be remade
until you finish a long rest.
M'lÍor Transfarmatian. Vou can transmute one
nonmagical object-no larger than a 5.fool cube-inlo
another nonmagical object of similar size and mass and
of equal or lesse r value. Vou must spend 10 minutes
handling the object lOlransform it.
Panacea. Vou remove ali curses, diseases, and poisons
affecting a crealure that you touch with the transmuter's
stone. The creature also regains ali its hit points.
Restare Life. Vou cast the raise dead spell on a
creature you touch with the transmuter's stone, without
expending a spell si 01 or needing to have the spell in
your spellbook.
Restare Yauth. Vou touch the transmuter's stone to
a willing creature, and that creature's apparent age is
reduced by 3dlO years, to a minimum of 13 years. This
effect doesn't extend lhe creature's lifespan.

NRT

J

CLASSES

"9

CHAPTER
~

4: PERSONALITY

HARACTERS ARE DEFINED BY MUCH MORE THAN

their race and c1ass. They're individuais with
their own stories, interests, connections, and
capabilities beyond those that c1ass and race
define. This chapter expounds on the details
that distinguish characters from one another,
including the basics of name and physical description,
the rules of backgrounds and languages, and the finer
points of personality and alignment.

CHARACTER

Your character's name and physical description might
be the first things that the other players at the table
learn about you. !t's worth thinking about how these
characteristics reflect the character you have in mind.

NAME
Your character's race description includes sample
names for members of that race. Put some thought into
your name even if you're just picking one from a list.

SEX
Vou can play a male or female character without gaining
any special benefits or hindrances. Think about how
your character does or does not conform to the broader
cu!ture's expectations of sex, gender, and sexual
behavior. For example, a male drow c1eric defies the
traditional gender divisions of drow society, which could
be a reason for your character to leave that society and
come to the surface.
TIKA

•••
ANO

ARTEMIS:

CONTRASTING

CHARACTERS

The details in this chapter make a big difference in setting
your character apart from every other character. Consider the
following two human fighters.
Hailing from the Dragonlance setting, Tika Waylan was a
brash teenager who had a rough childhood. The daughter of
a thief, she ran away from home and practiced her father's
trade on the streets of Solace. When she tried to rob the
proprietor of the Inn of the Last Home, he caught her and
took her under his wing, giving her a job as a barmaid. Sut
when the dragonarmies laid waste to the town ofSolace
and destroyed the inn, necessity forced Tika into adventure
alongside the friends she'd known from her childhood. Her
skill as a fighter (a frying pan remains one ofher favorite
weapons) combined with her history on the streets gave her
skills invaluable in her adventuring career.
Artemis Entrer; grew up on the streets of Calimport in the
Forgotten Realms. He used his wits, strength, and agility
to carve out his own territory in one of the city's hundreds
of poor shanty towns. After several years, he attracted the
notice of one ofthe most powerful thieves' guilds in the city,
and he ascended the ranks ofthe guild quickly despite his
youth. Artemis became the favored assassin of one ofthe
city's pashas, who sent him to far-off Icewind Dale to recover
some stolen gems. He's a professional killer, constantly
challenging himselfto improve his skills.
Tika and Artemis are both human and both fighters (with
some experience as rogues), possessing similarly high
Strength and Dexterity scores, but there the similarity ends.

••

Vou don't need to be confined to binary notions of
sex and gender. The elf god Corellon Larethian is often
seen as androgynous or hermaphroditic, for example,
and some elves in the multiverse are made in Corellon's
image. Vou could also play a female character who
presents herself as a man, a man who feels trapped in a
female body, or a bearded female dwarf who hates being
mistaken for a male. Likewise, your character's sexual
orientation is for you to decide.

HEIGHT

DETAILS

•••

AND BACKGROUND

AND WEIGHT

Vou can decide your character's height and weight,
using the information provided in your race description
or on the Random Height and Weight table. Think about
what your character's ability scores might say about his
or her height and weight. A weak but agile character
might be thin. A strong and tough character might be
tall or just heavy.
If you want to, you can roll randomly for your
character's height and weight using the Random Height
and Weight table. The dice roll given in the Height
Modifier column determines the character's extra
height (in inches) beyond the base height. That same
number multiplied by the dice roll or quantity given in
the Weight Modifier column determines the character's
extra weight (in pounds) beyond the base weight.
RANOOM

HEICHT

Race
Human
Dwarf, hill
Dwarf, mountain

Elf, high
Elf, wood

ANO WEICHT
Base
Height

Height
Modifier

Base
Weight

Weight
Modifier

4'8"

+2d10

1101b.

3'8"
4'
4'6"

+2d4
+2d4

1lS Ib.
130Ib.

x (2d4) Ib.
x (2d6) Ib.

+2d10

4'6"

+2d10
+2d6

901b.
1001b.

Elf, drow
Halfling

4'5"
2'7"

Dragonborn

5'6"
2'11"

Gnome
Half-elf
Half-orc

4'9"
4'10"

Tiefling

4'9"

+2d4
+2d8
+2d4
+2d8
+2d10
+2d8

751b.
351b.
1751b.
351b.
1101b.
1401b.
1101b.

x (2d6) Ib.
x (ld4) Ib.
x (ld4) Ib.
x (ld6) Ib.
xllb.
x (2d6) Ib.
xl Ib.
x (2d4) Ib.
x (2d6) Ib.
x (2d4) Ib.

For example, as a human, Tika has a height of 4 feet 8
inches plus 2dlO inches. Her player rolls 2dlO and gets
a total of 12, so Tika stands 5 feet 8 inches tal I. Then
the player uses that same roll of 12 and multiplies it by
2d4 pounds. Her 2d4 roll is 3, so Tika weighs an extra
36 pounds (12 x 3) on top of her base 110 pounds, for a
total of 146 pounds.

OTHER

••

PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS

Vou choose your character's age and the color of
his or her hair, eyes, and skin. To add a touch of
distinctiveness, you might want to give your character
an unusual or memorable physical characteristic, such
as a scar, a limp, or a tatlOo.

PAR r 1 IPI' RSONAIITY.\

D BACKGROU

U

121

••

TIKA

AND

ARTEMIS:

CHARACTER

••

DETAILS

doing what seems best at the time. Lizardfolk, most
druids, and many humans are neutra!.
Chaotic neutral (CN) creatures follow their whims,
holding their personal freedom above ali else.
Many barbarians and rogues, and some bards, are
chaotie neutra!.
Lawful evil (LE) creatures methodically take what they
want, within the limits of acode of tradition, loyalty, or
order. Devils, blue dragons, and hobgoblins are Jawful evil.
Neutral evil (NE) is the alignment of those who do
whatever they can get away with, without compassion or
qualms. Many drow, some e10ud giants, and yugoloths
are neutra I evi!.
Chaotic evil (CE) creatures act with arbitrary
violence, spurred by their greed, hatred, or bloodlust.
Demons, red dragons, and orcs are chaotie evil.

Consider how the names Tika Waylan and Artemis Entreri
set these characters apart from each other and refiect their
personalities. Tika is a young woman determined to prove
that she's not just a kid any more, and her name makes her
sound young and ordinary. Artemis Entreri comes from an
exotic land and carries a more mysterious name.

Tika is nineteen years old at the start of her adventuring
career and has aubum hair, green eyes, fair skin with freckles,
and a mole on her right hip. Artemis is a small man, compact
and ali wiry muscle. He has angular features and high
cheekbones, and he always seems in need of a shave. His
raven.black hair is thick and full, but his eyes are gray and
Iifeless-betraying
the emptiness of his life and sou I.

..

...•..---------------------ALIGNMENT

A typical creature in the worlds of DUNGEONS&
DRAGONShas an alignment, which broadly describes
its moral and personal attitudes. Alignment is a
combinalion of two factors: one identifies morality
(good, evil, or neutra I), and the olher describes
altitudes toward society and order (Iawful, chaotie,
or neutral). Thus, nine distinct alignments define the
possible combinations.
These brief summaries of the nine alignments
describe the typical behavior of a creature with that
alignment. Individuais might vary significantly from
that typical behavior, and few people are perfectly and
consistently faithful to the precepts of their alignment.
Lawful good (LG) creatures can be counted on to do
the right thing as expected by society. Gold dragons,
paladins, and most dwarves are lawful good.
Neutral good (NG) folk do the best they can to help
others according to their needs. Many celestiais, some
e10ud giants, and most gnomes are neutral good.
Chaotic good (CG) creatures act as their conscience
directs, with little regard for what others expect. Copper
dragons, many elves, and unicorns are chaotie good.
Lawful neutra I (LN) individuais act in accordance
with law, tradition, or personal codes. Many monks and
some wizards are lawful neutra!.
Neutral (N) is the alignment of those who prefer to
steer e1ear of moral questions and don't take sides,

DWARVISH

ALIGNMENT

IN THE MULTIVERSE

For many thinking creatures, alignment is a moral
choice. Humans, dwarves, e1ves, and other humanoid
races can choose whether to follow the paths of good or
evil, law or chaos. According to myth, the good-aligned
gods who created these races gave them free will to
choose their moral paths, knowing that good without
free will is slavery.
The evil deities who created other races, though, made
those races to serve them. Those races have strong
inborn tendencies that match the nature of their gods.
Most orcs share the violent, savage nature of the orc
god, Gruumsh. and are thus inelined toward evil. Even if
an orc chooses a good alignment, it struggles against its
innate tendencies for its entire life. (Even half-orcs feel
the lingering pull of the orc god's influence.)
Alignment is an essential pari of the nature of
celestiaIs and fiends. A devil does not choose to be
lawful evil, and it doesn't tend toward lawful evil, but
rather it is lawful evil in its essence. If it somehow
ceased to be lawful evil, it would cease to be a devil.
Most creatures that lack the capacity for rational
thought do nol have alignments-they
are unaligned.
Such a creature is incapable of making a moral or
ethical choice and acts according to its bestial nature.
Sharks are savage predators, for example, but they are
not evil; they have no alignment.

SCRIPT:

SAMPLE

ALPHABET

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

L

M

<

T

]

"J

~

Ir

11

+

1

:J

~

Y

P

N

O

p

Q

R

S

T

U

V

W

X

y

Z

V

t)

r

I

~

~

r

~

'11

~

~

n

~

AND

BACKGROUND

I.

122

PART I

I PERSONALlTY

Tika Waylan is neutral good, fundamentally good-hearted
and striving to help others where she cano Artemis is lawful
evil, unconcerned with the value of sentient life but at least
professional in his approach to murder.
As an evil character, Artemis is not an ideal adventurer. He
began his career as a villain, and only cooperates with heroes
when he must-and when it's in his own best interests. In
most games, evil adventurers cause problems in groups
alongside others who don't share their interests and objectives.
Generally, evil alignments are for villains and monsters.

Your race indicates the languages your character can
speak by default, and your background
might give you
access to one or more additionallanguages
Df your
choice. Note these languages on your character sheet.
Choose your languages from the Standard Languages
table, or choose one that is common in your campaign.
With your DM's permission,
you can instead choose a
language from the Exotic Languages table or a secret
language, such as thieves' cant or the tongue Df druids.
Some Df these languages are actually families
Df languages with many dialects. For example, the
Primordiallanguage
includes the Auran, Aquan, Ignan,
and Terran dialects, one for each Df the four elemental
planes. Creatures that speak different dialects Df the
same language can communicate
with one another.
STANDARD

Typieal Speakers

Seript

Common

Humans
Dwarves

Common

Gnomes

Dwarvish
Dwarvish

Goblin
Halfling

Goblinoids
Halflings

Common

Ore

Ores

Dwarvish

PERSONALITY

Typical Speakers
Demons

Infernal

Celestial

Celestial

Draconic

Celestiais
Dragons,

Deep Speech

dragonborn
Mind flayers,

Seript

Draconic

beholders
Infernal
Primordial
Sylvan
Undercommon

Devils
Elementals
Fey creatures

Infernal
Dwarvish
Elvish

Underdark traders

Elvish

TRAITS

Give your character two personality traits. Personality
traits are small, simple ways to help you set your
character apart from every other character. Your
personality traits should tell you something interesting
and fun about your character. They should be self.
descriptions
that are specific about what makes your
character stand out. "I'm smart" is not a good trait,
because it describes a lot Df characters.
"!'ve read every
book in Candlekeep"
tells you something specific about
your character's
interests and disposition.
Personality
traits might describe the things your
character likes, his or her past accomplishments,
things
your character dislikes or fears, your character's
sei fattitude or mannerisms,
or the influence Df his or her
ability scores.

LANCUAGES

Language

CHARACTERISTICS

Fleshing out your character's
personality-the
array Df
traits, mannerisms,
habits, beliefs, and flaws that give
a person a unique identity-will
help you bring him
or her to life as you play the game. Four categories Df
characteristics
are presented here: personality traits,
ideais, bonds, and flaws. Beyond those categories,
think about your character's
favorite words or phrases,
tics and habitual gestures, vices and pet peeves, and
whatever else you can imagine.
Each background
presented later in this chapter
includes suggested characteristics
that you can use
to spark your imagination.
You're not bound to those
options, but they're a good starting point.

Dwarvish

Abyssal

~

PERSONAL

Dwarvish
Elvish

Elves
Ogres, giants

Giant
Gnomish

EXOTIC

~

LANCUACES

Language
Dwarvish
Elvish

•••

""TIKA ANO ARTEMIS: ALIGNMENT

LANGUAGES

ELVISH

SCRIPT:

A

B

C

D

E

F

G

H

I

J

K

L

M

()

O

a

S

(J

(

r6

!J

w

1

cf

ri

fJ

(lJ

N

o

p

Q

R

S

T

U

V

W

x

y

z

if

:(

c)

(9

d

()

fj

J

(9

PART 1 J PERSONALllY

ANO

BACKGROlJ

(j{

SAM PLE ALPHABET

1

ff)

IC

I.)
123

h

A
TIKA

ANO

ARTEMIS:

PERSONAL

CHARACTERISTICS

IDEALS

Tika and Artemis have distinct personality traits. Tika Waylan
dislikes boastfulness and has a fear of heights resulting
from a bad fali during her career as a thief. Artemis Entreri
is always prepared for the worst and moves with a quick,
precise confidence.
Consider their ideais. Tika Waylan is innocent, almost
childlike, believing in the value oflife and the importance of
appreciating everyone. Neutral good in alignment, she c1eaves
to ideais of life and respec!. Artemis Entreri never allows
his emotions to master him, and he constantly challenges
himself to improve his skills. His lawful evil alignment gives
him ideais of impartiality and a lust for power.
Tika Waylan's bond is to the Inn ofthe Last Home. The
inn's proprietor gave her a new chance at life, and her
friendship with her adventuring companions was forged
during her time working there. Its destruction by the
marauding dragonarmies
gives Tika a very personal reason to
hate them with a fiery passion. Her bond might be phrased
as "I will do whatever it takes to punish the dragonarmies for
the destruction ofthe Inn ofthe Last Home."
Artemis Entreri's bond is a strange, almost paradoxical
relationship with Drizzt Do'Urden, his equal in swordplay
and grim determination.
In his first battle with Drizzt,
Artemis recognized something of himself in his opponent,
some indication that if his life had gone differently, he
might have led a life more like the heroic drow's. From that
moment, Artemis is more than a criminal assassin-he

Describe one ideal that drives your character. Your ideais
are the things that you believe in most strongly, the
fundamental moral and ethical principies that compel you
to act as you do. Ideais encompass everything from your
life goals to your core belief system.
Ideais might answer any of these questions: What are
the principies that you will neve r betray? What would
prompt you to make sacrifices? What drives you to act
and guides your goals and ambitions? What is the single
most important thing you strive for?
Vou can choose any ideais you like, but your
character's alignment is a good place to start defining
them. Each background in this chapter includes six
suggested ideais. Five of them are linked to aspects of
alignment: law, chaos, good, evit, and neutrality. The last
one has more to do with the particular background than
with moral or ethical perspectives.
BONDS

Create one bond for your character. Bonds represent a
character's connections to people, places, and events in
the world. They tie you to things from your background.
They might inspire you to heights of heroism, or lead
you to act against your own best interests if they are
threatened. They can work very much like ideaIs,
driving a character's motivations and goals.
Bonds might answer any of these questions: Whom do
you care most about? To what place do you feeI a special
connection? What is your most treasured possession?
Your bonds might be tied to your c1ass, your
background, your race, or some other aspect of your
character's history or personality. Vou might also gain
new bonds over the course of your adventures.

is an

antihero, driven by his rivalry with Drizz!. His bond might be
phrased as "I will not rest untill have proved myselfbetter
than Drizzt Do'Urden."
Each of these characters also has an important flaw.
Tika Waylan is naive and emotionally vulnerable, younger
than her companions and annoyed that they still think
of her as the kid they knew years ago. She might even be
tempted to act against her principies if she's convinced that
a particular achievement would demonstrate
her maturity.
Artemis Entreri is completely walled offfrom any personal
relationship and just wants to be left alone.

~

FLAWS

,.

Finally, choose a flaw for your character. Your
character's flaw represents some vice, compulsion, fear,
or weakness-in particular, anything that someone
e1se could exploit to bring you to ruin ar cause you to
act against your best interests. More significant than
nega tive personality traits, a flaw might answer any
of these questions: What enrages you? What's the one
person, concept, or event that you are terrified of? What
are your vices?

A useful place to start thinking about personality
traits is to look at your highest and lowest ability scores
and define one trait related to each. Either one could be
positive or nega tive: you might work hard to overcome a
low score, for example, or be cocky about your high score.

DRACONIC

PART
124

SCRIPT:

SAMPLE

A

B

C

-

'-

V

N

r
I

ALPHABET

D

E

t

O

p

0--

t

I PERSONALITY

ANO

F

G

lf

~

T

1r

Q

R

S

T

,-

W

"'J

1ff

BACKCROUND

H

•

J

K

L

M

'f

7

f

1

"}

V

W

X

Y

Z

~

f

1f

V

J'"

I

~

U

::).

,

INSPIRATION
Inspiration is a rule the Dungeon Master can use to
reward you for playing your character in a way that's
true to his or her personality traits, ideal, bond, and flaw.
By using inspiration, you can draw on your personality
trait of compassion for the downtrodden to give you
an edge in negotiating with the Beggar Prince. Or
inspiration can let you calI on your bond to the defense
of your home village to push past the effect of a spelI
that has been laid on you.

GAINING

INSPIRATION

Your DM can choose to give you inspiration for a variety
of reasons. TypicalIy, DMs award it when you play
out your personality traits, give in to the drawbacks
presented by a flaw or bond, and otherwise portray your
character in a compelIing way. Your DM wilI telI you
how you can earn inspiration in the game.
Vou either have inspiration or you don't-you can't
stockpile multi pie "inspirations" for later use.

USING INSPIRATION
lf you have inspiration, you can expend it when you make
an attack rolI, saving throw, or ability check. Spending
your inspiration gives you advantage on that rol!.
AdditionalIy, if you have inspiration, you can reward
another player for good roleplaying, e1ever thinking,
or simply doing something exciting in the game.
When another player characler does somelhing that
realIy contributes to the story in a fun and interesting
way, you can give up your inspiration to give lhat
characler inspiration.

BACKGROUNDS
Every story has a beginning. Your character's
background reveals where you carne from, how you
beca me an adventurer, and your place in the world.
Your tighter might have been a courageous knight or a
grizzled soldier. Your wizard could have been a sage or
an artisan. Your rogue might have gotten by as a guild
thief or commanded audiences as a jester.
Choosing a background provides you with important
story cues about your character's identity. The most
important question to ask about your background is
what changed? Why did you stop doing whatever your
background describes and start adventuring? Where
did you get the money to purchase your starting gear, or,
if you come from a wealthy background, why don't you
have more money? How did you learn the skills of your
e1ass? What sets you apart from ordinary people who
share your background?
4
TIKA

,
ANO

ARTEMIS:

BACKCROUNOS

Tika Waylan and Artemis Entreri bolh lived lheir earliest years
as street urchins. Tika's later career as a barmaid didn't really
change her, so she might choose the urchin background,
gaining proficiency in the Sleight of Hand and Stealth skills.
and learning

the tools ofthe

thieving

trade. Artemis

is more

defined by his criminal background, giving him skills in
Deception and Steallh, as well as proficiency wilh lhe tools of
lhievery and poison .

.•••
r---------------------JI"-

The sample backgrounds in this chapter provide
both concrete benetits (features, proticiencies, and
languages) and roleplaying suggestions.
PROFICIENCIES

Each background gives a character proticiency in two
skills. SkilIs are described in chapter 7.
In addition, most backgrounds give a character
proticiency with one or more tools. Tools and tool
proticiencies are detailed in chapter 5.
If a character would gain the same proticiency from
two different sources, he or she can choose a different
proticiency of the same kind (skilI or tool) instead.
LANGUAGES

Some backgrounds also alIow characters to learn
additional languages beyond those given by race.
See "Languages" earlier in this chapter.
EQUIPMENT

Each background provides a package of starting
equipmcnt. lf you use the optional rule from chapter 5
to spend coin on gear, you do not receive the starting
equipment from your background.
SUGGESTED

CHARACTERISTICS

A background contains suggested personal
characleristics based on your background. Vou can
pick characteristics, rolI dice to determine
them randomly, or use the suggestions
as inspiration for characteristics of
your own creation.
CUSTOMIZING
BACKGROUND

A

Vou might want to tweak
some of the features of a
background so it better
tits your character
or the campaign
setting. To customize
a background, you can
replace one feature
with any other one,
choose any two
skills, and choose
a total of two to01
proticiencies or
languages from the
sample backgrounds.
Vou can either use
the equipment
package from your
background or spend
coin on gear as
described in chapter
5. (lf you spend
coin, you can't also
take the equipment
package suggestcd
for your c1ass.)
FinalIy, choose
two personality

traits, one ideal. one bond, and one flaw. lfyou can't find
a feature that matches your desired background, work
with your DM to create one.

d8

Personality

1

I idolize a parlicular

Trail
hero of my faith, and conslanlly

refer lo Ihal person's

ACOLYTE

2

Vou have spent your life in the service of a temple
to a specific god or pantheon of gods, Vou act as an
intermediary between the realm of the holy and the
mortal world, performing sacred rites and offering
sacrifices in order to conduct worshipers into the
presence of the divine. Vou are not necessarily a
cleric-performing
sacred rites is not the same thing aS
channeling divine power.
Choose a god, a pantheon of gods, or some other
quasi-divine being from among those listed in appendix
B or those specified by your DM, and work with your
DM to detail the nature of your religious service.
Were you a lesser functionary in a temple, raised from
childhood to assist the priests in the sacred rites? Or
were you a high priest who suddenly experienced a call
to serve your god in a different way? Perhaps you were
the leader of a small cult outside of any established
tem pIe structure, or even an occult group that served a
fiendish master that you now deny.
Skill Proficiencies: Insight, Religion
Languages: Two of your choice
Equiprnent: A holy symbol (a gift to you when you
entered the priesthood), a prayer book or prayer
wheel, 5 sticks of incense, vestments, a set of common
clothes, and a belt pouch containing 15 gp
FEATURE:

SHELTER

OF THE FAITHFUL

As an acolyte, you command the respect of those who
share your faith, and you can perform the religious
ceremonies of your deity. You and your adventuring
companions can expect to receive free healing and
care at a temple, shrine, or other established presence
of your faith, though you must provide any material
components needed for spells. Those who share
your religion will support you (but only you) at a
modest lifestyle.
Vou might also have ties to a specific tem pIe dedicated
to your chosen deity or pantheon, and you have a
residence there, This could be the temple where you
used to serve, if you remain on good terms with it, or a
temple where you have found a new home, While near
your temple. you can call upon the priests for assistance.
provided the assistance you ask for is not hazardous and
you remain in good standing with your temple.
SUGGESTED

CHARACTERISTICS

Acolytes are shaped by their experience in temples
or other religious communities. Their study of the
history and tenets of their faith and their relationships
to temples, shrines, or hierarchies affect their
mannerisms and ideaIs. Their flaws might be some
hidden hypocrisy or heretical idea, or an ideal or bond
taken to an extreme.

I can find common
enemies,
loward

3

deeds

and example,

ground

empalhizing

belween

lhe fiercesl

wilh Ih em and always working

peace.

I see omens

in every evenl and aclion.

lhe

gods Iry lo

speak lo uso we jusl need lo lislen
4

NOlhing can shake my oplimislic

S

I quole

(or misquole)

sacred

altilude.

lexls and proverbs

in

almost every situation.
6

7

8

I am loleranl

(or inloleranl)

(or condemn)

lhe worship

of olher failhs and respecl
of olher gods.

I've enjoyed

fine food, drink, and high society

my temple's

elite. Rough living grates

among

on me.

I've spenl

so long in the tem pie that I have liltle

practical

experience

dealing

with people

in the outside

world.

d6

Ideal

1

Tradilion.

lhe

aneient

sacrifice

must

be preserved

Charily.

I always try to help those

2

what the personal
Change.

in need, no matter

cosI. (Good)

working

changes

in the world.

lhe

((haotic)

hierarchy.

(Lawful)

Failh. I trust that my deity will guide my aclions.
faith that if I work hard, things

6

and

(Lawful)

Power. I hope to one day rise to the top of my failh's
religious

S

of worship

and upheld.

We must help bring aboullhe

gods are constantly
4

traditions

Aspiralion.

I have

will go well. (Lawful)

I seek lo prove myself worthy of my god's

favor by matching
teachings.

my actions

againsl

his or her

(Any)

d6

Bond

1

I would die lo recover an ancient

relic of my faith that

was lost long ago.
2

I will someday
hierarchy

3

get revenge

who branded

on the corrupt

temple

me a heretic.

I owe my life to the priest who took me in when my
parenls

died.

4

Everylhing

S

I will do anylhing

I do is for the common
lo prolect

the tem pie where

6

I seek to preserve

a sacred

text that my enemies

consider

and seek to destroy.

heretical

d6

Flaw

1

I judge olhers

2

I pulloo

harshly,

I served.

and myself even more severely.

much Irusl in Ihose who wield power wilhin

my lemple's
3

people.

hierarchy.

My piely somelimes
that profess

leads me lo blindly Irusllhose

failh in my god.

4

Iam inflexible

in my Ihinking.

5

I am suspicious

af strangers

and expect

the worst cf

them.
6

Once I pick a goal, I become
detriment

of everylhing

P..\l{f

obsessed

wilh it to the

else in my life.

11 PERSONAIITY

D B \( KGROU.

O
127

CHARLATAN

d8

Personality Trait

Vou have always had a way with people. Vou know
what makes them tick. you can tease out their hearts'
desires after a few minutes of conversation,
and with a
few leading questions you can read them like they were
children's books. !t's a useful talent, and one that you're
perfectly willing to use for your advantage.
Vou know what people want and you deliver. or rather,
you promise to deliver. Common sense should steer
people away from things that sound toa good to be true,
but common sense seems to be in short supply when
you're around. The bottle of pink-colored liquid will
surely cure that unseemly rash, this ointment-nothing
more than a bit of fat with a sprinkle of silver dust-can
restore youth and vigor, and there's a bridge in the city
thatjust happens to be for sale. These marvels sound
implausible, but you make them sound like the real dea!.

1

I fali in and out of love easily, and am always pursuing

2

someone.
I have a joke for every occasion, especially occasions

3

where humor is inappropriate.
Flattery is my preferred trick for getting what I want,

4

I'm a born gambler who can't resist taking a risk for a

S

potential payoff.
I lie about almost everything. even when there's no

6

good reason to.
Sarcasm and insults are my weapons of choice.

Skill Proficiencies:
Deception, Sleight of Hand
Too! Proficiencies:
Disguise kit, forgery kit
Equiprnent:
A set of fine c1othes, a disguise kit, tools
of the con of your choice (ten stoppered bottles filled
with colored liquid, a set of weighted dice, a deck of
marked cards, or a signet ring of an imaginary duke).
and a belt pouch containing
15 gp
FAVORITE SCHEMES
Every charlatan has an angle he or she uses in
preference to other schemes. Choose a favorite scam or
roll on the table below.

7

I keep multiple holy symbols on me and invoke
whatever deity might come in useful at any given

8

momento
I pocket anything I see that might have some value.

d6

Ideal

1

Independence.

2

to do. ((haotic)
Fairness. I never target people who can't afford to lose

3

a few coins. (Lawful)
Charity. I distribute the money I acquire to the people

4
S

who really need it. (Good)
Creativity. I never run the same con twice. ((haotic)
Friendship. Material goods come and go. Bonds of

6

friendship last forever, (Good)
Aspiration. I'm determined to make something

I am a free spirit-no

one tells me what

of myself. (Any)
d6

Scam

1
2
3

I cheat at games of chance.
I shave coins or forge documents.
I insinuate myselfinto people's lives to prey on their
weakness and secure their fortunes.

d6

Bond

1

I fleeced the wrong person and must work to ensure
that this individual never crosses paths with me or

4

I put on new identities like clothes.

2

S
6

I run sleight-of.hand cons on street corners.
I convince people that worthless junk is worth their
hard.earned

SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Charlatans
are colorful characters who conceal their
true selves behind the masks they construcl. They
reflect what people want to see, what they want to
believe, and how they scc the world. But their true
sclves are sometimes
plagued by an uneasy conscience,
a n old enemy, or deep-seated
trust issues.

horrible person

4

who's probably rotting in jail somewhere.
Somewhere out there, I have a child who doesn't
know me. I'm making the world better for him or her.
I come frem a noble family, and one day 1'11reelaim my

S

lands and title from those who stole them from me.
A powerful person killed someone I love. Some day

6

soon, 1'11have my revenge.
I swindled and ruined a person who didn't deserve il. I

3

money.

FEATURE: FALSE IDENTITY
Vou have created a second identity that includes
documentation,
established
acquaintallces,
and
disguises that allow you to assume that persona.
Additionally, you can forge documents including official
papers and personal letters, as long as you have seen an
example of the kind of document or the handwriting
you
are trying to copy.

those I care about.
I owe everything to my mentor-a

seek to atone for my misdeeds but might never be able
to forgive myself.
d6

Flaw

1
2

I can't resist a pretty face.
I'm always in debt. I spend my ill.gotten gains on

3

decadent luxuries faster than I bring them in..
I'm convinced that no one could ever fool me the way

S

I fool others.
I'm too greedy for my own good. I can'! resist taking a
risk if there's money involved.
I can'! resist swindling people who are more powerful

6

than me.
I hate to admit it and will hate myself for it, but 1'11run

4

and preserve my own hide if the going gets tough.
PART 1 I PERSONALlTY ANO BACKGROUNO
128

CRIMINAL

d6

Ideal

Vou are an experienced
criminal wilh a hislory of
breaking lhe law. Vou have spenl a 101of lime among
olher criminais and still have conlacls wilhin lhe
criminal underworld. You're far closer lhan mosl people
lo lhe world of murder, lhefl, and violence lhal pervades
lhe underbelly of civilizalion, and you have survived up lo
lhis poinl by f10uling lhe rules and regulalions of sociely.

1
2

Honor. I don't steal from others in the trade. (Lawful)
Freedom. (hains are meant to be broken, as are those

Skill Proficiencies:
Deceplion, Slealth
Tool Proficiencies:
One lype of gaming seI,
lhieves' lools
Equiprnent:
A crowbar, a seI of dark common clolhes
including a hood, and a bell pouch conlaining
15 gp
CRIMINAL SPECIALTY
There are many kinds of criminais, and wilhin a lhieves'
guild or similar criminal organizalion,
individual
members have particular speciallies.
Even criminais
who operale oulside of such organizalions
have slrong
preferences
for cerlain kinds of crimes over olhers.
Choose lhe role you played in your criminallife,
or roll
on lhe lable below.
d8

Specialty

d8

Specialty

1

Blaekmailer
Burglar

5
6

Highway robber
Hired killer

Enforeer
Fenee

7
8

Piekpocket
Smuggler

2

3
4

FEATURE: CRIMINAL CONTACT
Vou have a reliable and lruslworlhy
conlacl who acls as
your liaison lo a network of olher criminais. Vou know
how lo gel messages lo and from your conlacl, even
over greal dislances; specifically, you know lhe local
messengers,
corrupl caravan maslers, and seedy sailors
who can deliver messages for you.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Criminais mighl seem like villains on lhe surface,
and many of lhem are villainous lO lhe core. Sut some
have an abundance of endearing, if nol redeeming,
characlerislics.
There mighl be honor among lhieves, bul
criminais rarely show any respecl for law or aUlhorily.
d8

Personality Trait

1

I always have a plan for whal to do when lhings go
wrong.

2

I am always ealm, no maller what the situation. I never

3

The firsl thing I do in a new plaee is note the loeations

raise my voice ar let my emotions control me.

of everything valuable-or
hidden.

where sueh things eould be

4
5

I would rather make a new friend than a new enemy.
I am ineredibly slow to trust. Those who seem lhe
fairest often have the most to hide.

6

I don't pay attention to the risks in a siluation. Never
tell me the odds.
The best way to get me to do something is to tell me I
ean't do it.

7
8

I blow up at the slightest insult.

who would forge them. ((haotie)
3

Charity. I steal from the wealthy so that I ean help
people in need. (Good)

4

Greed. I will do whatever it takes to beco me
wealthy. (Evil)

5

People. I'm loyal to my friends, not to any ideais, and
everyone else ean lake a trip down the Styx for ali I
eare. (Neutral)

6

Redemption. There's a spark of good in everyone.
(Good)

d6

Bond

1

I'm trying to pay o f!' an old debt I owe to a generous
benefaetor.

2

My ill.gotten gains go to support my family.

3

Something important was laken from me, and I aim to
sleal it baek.

4

I will beeome the greatest thief that ever lived.

5

I'm guilty of a lerrible crime. I hope I ean redeem
myself for it.

6

Someone I loved died beeause of I mistake I made.
Thal will never happen again.

ENTERTAINER

d6

Flaw

1

When I see something

2

anything but how to steal it.
When faced with a choice between

3

friends, I usually choose the money.
If there's a plan, 1'11 forget it. If I don't forget it, 1'11

4

ignore il.
I have a "tell" that reveals when I'm Iying.

S
6

I tum tail and run when things look bad.
An innocent person is in prison for a crime that I
committed.

valuable,

I can't think about
money and my

I'm okay with that.

VARIANT CRIMINAL:

Spy

Although your capabilities are not much different
from those of a burglar or smuggler, you learned
and practiced them in a very different context: as an
espionage agenl. Vou might have been an officially
sanctioned agent of the crown, or perhaps you sold the
secrets you uncovered to the highest bidder.

Vou thrive in front of an audience. Vou know how to
entrance them, entertain them, and even inspire them.
Your poetics can stir the hearts of those who hear you,
awakening grief or joy, laughter or anger. Your music
raises their spirits or captures their sorrow. Your dance
steps captivate, your humor cuts to the quick. Whatever
techniques you use, your art is your life.
Skill Proficiencies: Acrobatics, Performance
Tool Proficiencies: Disguise kit, one type of
musical instrument
Equiprnent: A musical instrument (one of your choice),
the favor of an admirer (love lelter, lock of hair, or
trinket), a costume, and a belt pouch containing 15 gp
ENTERTAINER

ROUTINES

A good entertainer is versatile, spicing up every
performance with a variety of different routines. Choose
one to three routines or roll on the table below to define
your expertise as an entertainer.
dl0

Enterlainer

Actor
Dancer

6
7

Instrumentalist

8

4

Fire-eater
}ester

9

Poet
Singer
Storyteller

S

Juggler

10

Tumbler

dl0
1

2
3

Enterlainer

Routine

Routine

FEATURE: By POPULAR DEMAND

Vou can always find a place to perform, usually in an
inn or tavern but possibly with a circus, at a theater, or
even in a noble's court. At such a place, you receive free
lodging and food of a modest or comfortable standard
(depending on the quality of the establishment), as
long as you perform each night. In addition, your
performance makes you something of a local figure.
When strangers recognize you in a town where you have
performed, they typically take a liking to you.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS

Successful entertainers have to be able to capture
and hold an audience's attention, so they tend to
have flamboyant or forceful personalities. They're
inclined toward the romantic and often cling to
high-minded ideaIs about the practice of art and the
appreciation of beauty.
d8

Personality Trait

1
2

I know a story relevant to almost every situation.
Whenever I come to a new place, I collect local rumors

3

and spread gossip.
I'm a hopeless romantic,

always searching

for that

S
6

"special someone."
Nobody stays angry at me or around me for long, since
I can defuse any amount of tension.
I love a good insult, even one directed at me.
I get bitter if I'm not the center of attention.

7
8

1'11settle for nothing less than perfection.
I change my mood or my mind as quickly as I change

4

key in a song.

d6

Ideal

1

Beauly. When I perform,

2

il was. (Good)
Tradilion. lhe slories, legends, and songs of the past
must never be forgolten, for they teach us who we

3
4

I make lhe world belter lhan

are. (Lawful)
Creativily. lhe world is in need of new ideas and bold
action. (Chaotic)
Greed. I'm only in it for the money and fame. (Evil)

Ski1l Proficiencies: Animal Handling, Survival
Tool Proficiencies: One type of artisan's tools,
vehicles (land)
Equipment: A set of artisan's tools (one of your choice),
a shovel, an iran pot, a set of common clothes, and a
belt pouch containing 10 gp
DEFINING

5

People. I like seeing the smiles on people's faces when
I perform. lha!'s ali that matters. (Neutral)

6

Honesly. Art should reflect the soul; it should come
from within and reveal who we really are. (Any)

d6

Bond

1

My instrument is my most treasured
reminds me of someone I love.

2

Someone slole my precious instrumenl,
1'11get il back.

3
4

I wanl to be famous, whatever it takes.
I idolize a hero of the old tales and measure
against lhal person's.

5

I will do anything to prove myself superior to my hated
rival.

6

I would do anything for the other members
old troupe.

9

possession,

d6

Flaw

1

1'11do anything lo win fame and renown.

2

I'm a sucker for a pretty face.

and it

and someday

1

I stood up to a tyrant's

2
3

I saved people during a natural disaster.
I stood alone against a terrible monster.

4
5

I stole from a corrupt merchant to help the poor.
I led a militia to fight off an invading army.

6

I broke into a tyran!'s castle and stole weapons
the people.

to arm

7

I trained the peasantry

as

8

weapons against a tyrant's soldiers.
A lord rescinded an unpopular decree after I led a

me from ever going home again.

4

a mistake lhat I willlikely repeal.
I have trouble keeping my true feelings hidden. My
sharp tongue lands me in trouble.
Despile my best efforts, I am unreliable to my friends.

VARIANT ENTERTAINER:

GLADIATOR

A gladiator is as much an entertainer as any minstrel
or circus performer, trained to make the arts of combat
into a spectacle the crawd can enjoy. This kind of
flashy combat is your entertainer routine, though you
might also have some skills as a tumbler or actor.
Using your By Popular Demand feature, you can find a
place to perform in any place that features combat for
entertainment-perhaps
a gladiatorial arena or secret
pit fighting club. Vou can replace the musical instrument
in your equipment package with an inexpensive but
unusual weapon, such as a trident or neto

to use farm implements

A celestial, fey, or similar creature gave me a blessing
or revealed my secret origino
Recruited into a lord's army, I rose to leadership and
was commended

for my heroismo

FEATURE: RUSTIC HOSPITALITY

Since you come from the ranks of the common folk,
you fit in among them with ease. Vou can find a place
to hide, rest, or recuperate among other commoners,
unless you have shown yourself to be a danger to
them. They will shield you from the law or anyone
else searching for you, though they will not risk
their lives for YOU.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS

A folk hero is one of the common people, for better
or for worse. Most folk heraes look on their humble
origins as a virtue, not a shortcoming, and their home
communities remain very important to them.
d8

Personalily Trail

1

I judge people by lheir aclions, nol lheir words.

2

If someone

3

When I set my mind to something,
malter what gets in my way.

4

I have a strong sense of fair play and always try to find
the most equilable solution to arguments.

5

I'm confidenl in my own abilities and do what I can to
instill confidence in others.

6

lhinking

is for other people. I prefer action.

7

I misuse

long words in an attempt to sound smarter.

8

I get bored easily. When am I going to get on wilh my
desliny?

FOLK HERO
Vou come from a humble social rank, but you are
destined for so much more. Already the people of
your home village regard you as their champion, and
your destiny calls you to stand against the tyrants and
monsters that threaten the common folk everywhere.

agents.

symbolic act of protect against il.

10

A scandal prevents

6

Defining Evenl

of my

lhat kind of trouble seems to follow me around.
I once satirized a noble who still wants my head. It was

5

dl0

my deeds

3

EVENT

Vou previously pursued a simple prafession among
the peasantry, perhaps as a farmer, miner, servant,
shepherd, woodcutter, ar gravedigger. But something
happened that set you on a different path and marked
you for greater things. Choose or randomly determine a
defining event that marked you as a hera of the people.

is in trouble, I'm always ready to lend help.
I follow through

no

PART I I PERSONALlTY AND BACKGROUND

d6

Ideal

1

Respect.

People deserve

respect.

(Good)

Faimess.

No one should

2

to be treated

with dignity and

d6

Flaw

1

lhe

2

get preferentialtreatment

4

Freedom.

lyrants

people.

(Chaotic)

deserve.

Sincerity.

6

Destiny.

3

4

I can take what I want-

to

no good in pretending

5

to be

and no one can steer me away from

calling.

ofthe

significance

lhe

people

who knew me when
secret,

50 I can never

I have a weakness

ofmy

destiny,

and

and the risk oHailure.
I was young know my
go home again.

for the vices of the city, especially

hard drink.

I'm not. (Neutral)
Nothing

my higher

the

(Evil)

lhere's

something

to oppress

shameful

Might. If I beco me strong,
whatl

5

must not be allowed

I'm convinced

blind to my shortcomings

before the law, and no one is above the law. (Lawful)
3

tyrant who rules my land will stop at nothing

see me killed.

6

Secretly,

I believe thatthings

tyrantlording

over the land.

I have trouble

trusting

would be beller

if I were a

in my allies.

(Any)

GUILD ARTISAN
d6

Bond

1

I have a family, butl

have no idea where they are. One

day, I hope to see them
2

again.

I worked the land, I love the land, and I will protect

the

land.
3

4

A proud

6

beating,

on any bully I encounter.

My tools are symbols

of my pastlife,

50 that

5

noble once gave me a horrible

will take my revenge

and I carry them

I will never forget my roots.

I protectthose

who cannot

I wish my childhood
pursue

and I

my destiny.

protectthemselves.

sweetheart

had come with me to

Vou are a member of an artisan's guild, skilled in
a particular field and c10sely associated with other
artisans. Vou are a well-established part of the
mercantile world, freed by talent and wealth from the
constraints of a feudal social order. Vou learned your
skills as an apprentice to a master artisan, under the
sponsorship of your guild, until you became a master in
your own right.
Skill Proficiencies: lnsight, Persuasion
Tool Proficiencies: One type of artisan's tools
Languages: One of your choice
Equiprnent: A set of artisan's tools (one of your choice),
a letter of introduction from your guild, a set of
traveler's c1othes, and a belt pouch containing 15 gp
GUILD

BUSINESS

Guilds are generally found in cities large enough to
support several artisans practicing the same trade.
However, your guild might instead be a loose network
of artisans who each work in a different village within
a larger realm. Work with your DM to determine the
nature of your guild. Vou can select your guild business
from the Guild Business table or roll randomly.

'32

d20

Guild Business

1

Alchemists

and apothecaries

2

Armorers,

locksmiths,

3

Brewers,

4

Calligraphers,

5

Carpenters,

distillers,

scribes,
roofers,

6

Cartographers,

7

Cobblers

and finesmiths

and vintners
and scriveners
and plasterers

surveyors,

and chart-makers

and shoemakers

8

Cooks and bakers

9

Glassblowers

10

Jewelers

11

Leatherworkers,

12

Masons

and glaziers

and gemcutters
skinners,

and tanners

and stonecullers

13

Painters, Iimners, and sign.makers

14

Potters

15

Shipwrights

16

Smiths

17

Tinkers, pewterers, and casters

18

Wagon-makers

19

Weavers

20

Woodcarvers,

and tile-makers
and sailmakers

and metal-forgers
and wheelwrights

and dyers
coopers,

and bowyers

As a member of your guild, you know the skills needed
to creale finished items from raw materiaIs (reflected in
your proficiency with a certain kind of artisan's tools),
as well as the principies of trade and good business
practices. The question now is whether you abandon
your trade for adventure, or take on the extra effort to
weave adventuring and trade together.
FEATURE:

GUILD

Ideal

1

Community.

CHARACTERISTICS

Guild artisans are among the most ordinary people in
the world-until they set down their tools and take up
an adventuring career. They understand the value of
hard work and the importance of community, but they're
vulnerable to sins of greed and covetousness.
d8

Personality Trait

1

I believe that anything worth doing is worth doing
righl. I can't help it-I'm a perfectionisl.

It is the duty of ali civilized people to

strengthen the bonds of community
of civillzation. (Lawful)
2

Generosity.

and the security

My talents were given to me so that I could

use them to beneht the world. (Good)
3

Freedom. Everyone should be free to pursue his or her
own livelihood. (Chaotic)

4
S

Greed. I'm only in it for the money. (Evil)
People. I'm committed to the people I care about, not

6

to ideais. (Neutral)
Aspiration. I work hard to be the best there is at

MEMBERSHIP

As an established and respected member of a guild, you
can rely on certain benefits that membership provides.
Your fellow guild members will provide you with
lodging and food if necessary, and pay for your funeral
if needed. In some cities and towns, a guildhall offers a
central place to meet other members of your profession,
which can be a good place to meet potential patrons,
allies, or hirelings.
Guilds often wield tremendous political power. If
you are accused of a crime, your guild will support you
if a good case can be made for your innocence or the
crime isjustifiable. Vou can also gain access to powerful
political figures through the guild, if you are a member
in good standing. Such connections might require the
donation of money or magic items to the guild's coffers.
Vou must pay dues of 5 gp per month to the guild. If
you miss payments, you must make up back dues to
remain in the guild's good graces.
SUGGESTED

d6

my craft.
d6

Bond

1

The workshop

2

important place in the world to me.
I created a great work for someone, and then found

where I learned my trade is the most

them unworthy to receive it. I'm stilllooking
someone

for

worthy.

3

I owe my guild a great debt for forging me into the
person I am today.

4
S

I pursue wealth to secure someone's love.
One day I will return to my guild and prove that I am

6

the greatest artisan of them alI.
I will get revenge on the evil forces that destroyed
place ofbusiness

my

and ruined my Iivelihood.

d6

Flaw

1

1'11do anything to get my hands on something

2

priceless.
I'm quick to assume that someone

rare or

Is trying to cheat

me.

3

No one must ever learn that I once stole money from
guild coffers.

2

I'm a snob who looks down on those who can't
4

3

appreciate hne art.
I always want to know how things work and what

S

I would kill to acquire a noble title.

4

makes people tick.
I'm full ofwitty aphorisms

6

I'm horribly jealous of anyone who can outshine my
handiwork. Everywhere I go, I'm surrounded by rivais.

and have a proverb for

every occasion.

S

I'm rude to people who lack my commitment

6

work and fair play.
I like to talk at length about my profession.

I'm never satished

wlth what I have-I

always want

more.

to hard

7

I don't part with my money easily and will haggle
tirelessly to get the best deal possible.

8

I'm well known for my work, and I want to make sure
everyone appreclates lI. I'm always taken aback when
people haven't heard of me.

VARIANT

GUILD

ARTISAN:

GUlLD

MERCHANT

Instead of an artisans' guild, you might belong to a
guild of traders, caravan masters, or shopkeepers. Vou
don't craft items yourself but earn a living by buying
and selling lhe works of others (or the raw materiaIs
artisans need to practice lheir craft). Your guild might
be a large merchant consortium (or family) with
interests across the region. Perhaps you transported
goods from one place to another, by ship, wagon, or
caravan, or bought them from traveling traders and sold
them in your own little shop. In some ways, the traveling
merchant's life lends itself to adventure far more than
the life of an artisan.
Rather lhan proficiency with artisan's tools, you might
be proficient with navigator's tools or an additional
language. And instead of artisan's tools, you can start
with a mule and a carl.
PART I I PERSONALlTY ANO BACKGROUND

133

HERMIT

d8

Life ofSeclusion

Vou lived in seclusion-either
in a sheltered community
such as a monastery, or entirely aJone-for
a formative
part of your life. In your time apart from the clamor of
society, you found quiet, solitude, and perhaps some of
the answers you were looking for.

5

I needed a quiet plaee to work on my art, literature,

Skill Proficiencies:
Medicine, Religion
Tool Proficiencies:
Herbalism kit
Languages:
One of your choice
Equiprnent:
A scroll case stuffed full of notes fram your
studies or prayers, a winter blanket, a set of common
clothes, an herbalism kit, and 5 gp
LIFE OF SECLUSION
What was the reason for your isolation, and what
changed to allow you to end your solitude? Vou can work
with your DM to determine the exact nature of your
seclusion, or you can choose or roll on the table below to
determine the reason behind your seclusion.
d8

Life ofSeclusion

1

I was searehing for spiritual enlightenment.

2

I was partaking of eommunalliving
the dietates of a religious order.

3
4

music, ar manifesto.

6
7
8

I needed to eommune with nature, far from civilization.
I was the earetaker of an aneient ruin or relie.
I was a pilgrim in seareh of a person, plaee, or relie of
spiritual signifieanee.

FEATURE: DISCOVERY
The quiet seclusion of your extended hermitage gave you
access to a unique and powerful discovery. The exact
nature of this revelation depends on the nature of your
seclusion. It might be a great truth about the cosmos,
the deities, the powerful beings of the outer planes, or
the forces of nature. It could be a site that no one else
has ever seen. Vou might have uncovered a fact that has
long been forgotten, or unearthed
some reli c of the past
that could rewrite history. It might be information
that
would be damaging to the peopJe who or consigned you
to exile, and hence the reason for your return to society.
Work with your DM to determine the details of your
discovery and its impact on the campaign.

in aeeordanee with

I was exiled for a erime I didn't eommit.
I retreated from soeiety after a life-altering evento

SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Some hermits are well suited to a life of seclusion,
whereas others chafe against it and long for company.
Whether they embrace solitude or long to escape it, the
solitary life shapes their attitudes and ideais. A few are
driven slightly mad by their years apart from society.
d8

Personality Trait

1

I've been isolated for so long that I rarely speak,

2

preferring gestures and the oeeasional grunt.
I am utterly serene, even in the faee of disaster.

3

The leader of my eommunity had something wise

4
5

to say on every topie, and I am eager to share
that wisdom.
I feel tremendous empathy for ali who sulfer.
I'm oblivious to etiquette and soeial expeetations.

6

I eonneet everything that happens to me to a grand,

7

eosmie plan.
I often get lost in my own thoughts and eontemplation,

8

beeoming oblivious to my surroundings.
I am working on a grand philosophieal theory and love
sharing my ideas.

d6

Ideal

1

Greater Good. My gifts are meant to be shared with ali,

2

not used for my own benefit. (Good)
Logic. Emotions must not c10ud our sense of what is

4

right and true, or our logieal thinking. (Lawful)
Free Thinking. Inquiry and euriosity are the pillars of
progresso ((haotie)
Power. Solitude and eontemplation are paths toward

5

mystieal or magieal power. (Evil)
Live and Let Live. Meddling in the alfairs of others only

6

eauses trouble. (Neutral)
Self.Knowledge. If you know yourself, there's nothing

3

left to know. (Any)

134

d6
1
2
3
4
5
6

Bond
Nothing is more important than the other members of
my hermitage, order, or association.
I entered sedusion to hide from the ones who might
still be hunting me. I must someday confront them.
I'm still seeking the enlightenment I pursued in my
sedusion, and it still eludes me.
I entered sedusion because I lovedsomeone I could
not have.
Should mydiscoverycome to Iight,it could bring ruin to
the world.
Myisolationgave me great insight into a great evilthat
only I can destroy.

d6

Flaw

1

Nowthat I've returned to the world, I enjoy its delights
a little too much.
I harbor dark, bloodthirsty thoughts that my isolation
and meditation failed to quell.
I am dogmatic in mythoughts and philosophy.
I let my need to win arguments overshadow
friendships and harmony.
I'd risk too much to uncover a lost bit ofknowledge.
I likekeeping secrets and won't share them with
anyone.

2
3
4
5
6

OTHER

HERMITS

This hermit background assumes a contempla tive sort
of seclusion that allows room for study and prayer. If you
want to play a rugged wilderness recluse who lives off
the land while shunning the company of other people,
look at the outlander background. On the other hand, if
you want to go in a more religious direction, the acolyte
might be what you're looking for. Or you could even be a
charlatan, posing as a wise and holy person and letting
pious fools support you.

NOBLE
Vou understand wealth, power, and privilege. Vou
carrya noble title, and your family owns land, collects
taxes, and wields significant political influence. Vou
might be a pampered aristocrat unfamiliar with
work or discomfort, a former merchant just elevated
to the nobility, or a disinherited scoundrel with a
disproportionate sense of entitlement. Or you could be
an honest, hard-working landowner who cares deeply
about the people who live and work on your land, keenly
aware of your responsibility to them.
Work with your DM to come up with an appropriate
title and determine how much authority that title
carries. A noble title doesn't stand on its own-it's
connected to an entire family, and whatever title you
hold, you will pass it down to your own children. Not
only do you need to determine your noble title, but you
should also work with the DM to describe your family
and their influence on you.
Is your family old and established, or was your title
only recently bestowed? How much influence do they
wield, and over what area? What kind of reputation

does your family have among the other aristocrats of the
region? How do the common people regard them?
What's your position in the family? Are you the hei r
to the head of the family? Have you already inherited
the title? How do you feel about that responsibility? Or
are you so far down the line of inheritance that no one
cares what you do, as long as you don't embarrass the
family? How does the head of your family feel about
your adventuring career? Are you in your family's good
graces, or shunned by the rest of your family?
Does your family have a coat of arms? An insignia you
might wear on a signet ring? Particular colors you wear
all the time? An animal you regard as a symbol of your
line or even a spiritual member of the family?
These details help establish your family and your title
as features of the world of the campaign.
Skill Proficiencies: History, Persuasion
Toal Proficiencies: One type af gaming set
Languages: One of your choice
Equiprnent: A set of fine clothes, a signet ring, a scroll
of pedigree, and a purse containing 25 gp
FEATURE:

POSITION

OF PRIVILEGE

Thanks to your noble birth, people are inclined to
think the best of you. Vou are welcome in high society,
and people assume you have the right to be wherever
you are. The common folk make every effort to
accommodate you and avoid your displeasurc, and other
people of high birth treal you as a member of the same
social sphere. Vou can secure an audience with a local
noble if you need to.
SUGGESTED

CHARACTERISTICS

Nobles are born and raised to a very different lifestyle
than most people ever experience, and their personalities
reflect that upbringing. A noble title comes with a
plethora of bonds-responsibilities
to family, to other
nobles (including the sovereign), to the people entrusted
to the family's care, or even to the title itself. But this
responsibility is often a good way to undermine a noble.
dS
1

2
3
4
5
6
7
S

PersonalityTrait
Myeloquent ftattery makes everyone Italk to feel
Iikethe most wonderful and important person in the
world.
The common folk love me for my kindness and
generosity.
No one could doubt by lookingat my regai bearing tha!
I am a cut above the unwashed masses.
I take great pains to alwayslook my best and followthe
latest fashions.
Idon't liketo ge! my hands dirty, and I won't be caught
dead in unsuitable accommodations.
Despite my noble birth, I do not place myselfabove
other folk.We ali have the same blood.
Myfavor,once lost, is lost forever.
Ifyou do me an injury,Iwillcrush you, ruin your name,
and salt your fields.

PART 1 I PERSONALlTY

ANO BACKGROU"O

135

d6

Ideal

1

Respeet. Respeet is due to me beeause of my position,
but ali people regardless of station deserve to be

training on his or her own path to knighthood. Your two
remaining retainers might inelude a groom to care for
your horse and a servant who polishes your armor (and
even helps you put it on).
As an emblem of chivalry and the ideais of courtly
love, you might inelude among your equipment a banner
or other token from a noble lord or lady to whom you
have given your heart-in a chasle sort of devotion.
(This person could be your bond.)

treated with dignity. (Good)
Responsibility. It is my duty to respeet the authority of

2

those above me, just as those below me must respeet
mine. (Lawful)
3

Independenee.
I must prove that I ean handle myself
without the eoddling of my family. (Chaotie)

4

Power. If I ean altain more power, no one will tell me
what to do. (Evil)
Family. Blood runs thieker than water. (Any)

5
6

Noble Obligation.

It is my duty to proteet and eare for

the people beneath

me. (Good)

d6

Bond

1

I will face any ehallenge to win the approval of my
family.

2

My house's allianee with another noble family
must be sustained at ali costs.

3

Nothing is more important

4

of my family.
I am in love with the hei r of a family that my family

5

despises.
My loyalty to my sovereign is unwavering.

6

The eommon

OUTLANDER
Vou grew up in lhe wilds, far from civilization and the
comforts of town and technology. You've witnessed the
migration of herds larger than forests, survived weather
more extreme than any city-dweller could comprehend,
and enjoyed the solitude of being the only thinking
creature for miles in any direction. The wilds are in
your blood, whether you were a nomad, an explorer, a
reei use, a hunter-gatherer, or even a marauder. Even in
places where you don'l know the specific features of the
terrain, you know the ways of the wild.
Skill Proficiencies:

Athletics, Survival
Tool Proficiencies: One type of musical instrumenl
Languages: One of your choice
Equiprnent: A staff, a hunting trap, a trophy from an
animal you killed, a set of traveler's e1othes, and a belt
pouch containing 10 gp

than the other members

folk must see me as a hero of the people.
ORIGIN

d6

Flaw

1
2

I secretly believe that everyone is beneath me.
I hide a truly seandalous secret that eould ruin my

3

family forever.
I toe often hear veiled insults and threats in every word

4
5

addressed to me, and I'm quiek to anger.
I have an insatiable desire for carnal pleasures.
In faet, the world does revolve around me.

6

By my words and actions,

I often bring shame to

my family.
VARIANT NOBLE: KNIGHT

A knighthood is among the lowest noble titles in most
societies, but it can be a path to higher status. ]f you
wish to be a knight, choose the Retainers feature (see
the sidebar) instead of the Position of Privilege feature.
One of your commoner retainers is replaced by a noble
who serves as your squire, aiding you in exchange for

••

VARIANT

FEATURE:

••

PART

I

I PERSONALITY

AND

BACKGROUND

d10

Origin

d10

Origin

1

Forester

Bounty hunter

2
3

Trapper
Homesteader

6
7

4

Guide
Exile or outcast

5

8
9
10

Pilgrim
Tribal nomad
Hunter-gatherer
Tribal marauder

FEATURE:\¥ANDERER

•..

RETAINERS

If your character has a noble background, you may select this
background feature instead of Position of Privilege.
You have the service ofthree retainers loyal to your family.
These retainers can be attendants or messengers, and one
might be a majordomo. Your retainers are commoners who
can perform mundane tasks for you, but they do not fight
for you, will not follow you into obviously dangerous areas
(such as dungeons). and willleave ifthey are frequently
endangered or abused.

You've been to strange places and seen things that
others cannot begin to fathom. Consider some of the
distant lands you have visited, and how they impacted
you. Vou can roll on the following table lo delermine
your occupation during your time in the wild, or choose
one that best fits your character.

Vou have an excellent memory for maps and geography,
and you can always recall the generallayout of terrain,
settlements, and other features around you. In addition,
you can find food and fresh water for yourse]f and up to
five other people each day, provided that the land offers
berries, small game, water, and so forth.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS

Often considered rude and uncouth among civilized
folk, outlanders have little respect for the niceties of
life in the cHies. The ties of tribe, e1an, family, and the
natural world of which they are a part are the mosl
important bonds lo most outlanders.

,.

SAGE

d8

Personality Trait

1

I'm driven by a wanderlust

2

from home.
I wateh over my friends as if they were a litter of

3

newborn pups.
I onee ran twenty-five miles without stopping
to my e1an of an approaehing

that led me away

if I had to.
I have a lesson for every situation,

S

observing nature.
I plaee no stoek in wealthy or well-mannered

6

to warn

ore horde. I'd do it again

4

Money and manners

Vou spent years learning the lore of the multiverse. Vou
scoured manuscripts, studied scrolls, and listened to the
greatest experts on the subjects that interest you. Your
efforts have made you a master in your fields of study.

drawn from
folk.

won't save you from a hungry

owlbear.
I'm always pieking things up, absently fiddling with
them, and sometimes

aeeidentally

7

I feel far more eomfortable

8

people.
I was, in faet, raised by wolves.
Ideal

1

Change. Life is like the seasons,

2

and we must ehange with il. (Chaotie)
Greater Good. It is eaeh person's responsibility

3

make the most happiness for the whole tribe. (Good)
Honor. If I dishonor myself, I dishonor my whole

4

e1an. (Lawful)
Might. The strongest

S

Nature. The natural world is more important

6

the eonstruets of eivilization. (Neutral)
Glory. I must earn glory in battle, for myself and

in constant

ehange,
to

are meant to rule. (Evil)
than ali

(Any)

d6

Bond

1

My family, e1an, or tribe is the most important

2

my life, even when they are far from me.
An injury to the unspoiled wilderness of my home is an

3

injury to me.
I will bring terrible wrath down on the evildoers who

thing in

S

destroyed my homeland.
Iam the last of my tribe, and it is up to me to ensure
their names enter legend.
I suffer awful visions of a eoming disaster and will do

6

anything to prevent il.
It is my duty to provide ehildren to sustain my tribe.

4

d6

Flaw

1
2

I am too enamored of ale, wine, and other intoxieants.
There's no room for eaution in a life lived to the fullest.

3

I remember every insult I've reeeived and nurse a silent
resentment toward anyone who's ever wronged me.

4

Iam slow to trust members

of other raees, tribes, and

societies.

S
6

SPECIALTY

To determine the nature of your scholarly training, roll a
d8 or choose from the options in the table below.

breaking them.

around animais than

d6

myelan.

Skill Proficiencies: Arcana, History
Languages: Two ofyour choice
Equiprnent: A bottle of black ink, a quil!, a small knife,
a letter from a dead colleague posing a question you
have not yet been able to answer, a set of common
clothes, and a belt pouch containing 10 gp

Violenee is my answer to almost any ehallenge.
Don't expeet me to save those who ean't save
themselves. It is nature's way that the strong thrive
and the weak perish.

d8

Specialty

d8

Specialty

1

Alchemist

S
6
7

Professor
Researeher
Wizard's apprentiee

8

Seribe

2

Astronomer

3

Discredited

4

aeademie
Librarian

FEATURE:

RESEARCHER

When you atlempt to learn or recall a piece of lore, if you
do not know that information, you often know where and
fram whom you can obtain it. Usually, this information
comes from a !ibrary, scriptorium, university, or a sage
or other learned person or creature, Your DM might
rule that the knowledge you seek is secreted away in an
almost inaccessible place, or that it simply cannot be
found. Unearthing the deepest secrets of the multiverse
can require an adventure or even a whole campaign.
SUGGESTED

d8

Personality Trait

1

I use polysyllabie words that eonvey lhe impression

2

I've read every book in the world's greatest
or I like to boast that I have.

libraries-

3

I'm used lo helping oul lhose who aren't as smarl as I

4

am, and I patiently explain anything and everylhing
others.
There's nothing I like more lhan a good mystery.

S

I'm willing to listen to every side of an argumenl

CHARACTERISTICS

Sages are defined by their extensive studies, and their
characteristics reflect this !ife of study. Devoted to
scholarly pursuits, a sage values knowledge highlysometimes in its own right, sometimes as a means
toward other ideaIs.

of

greal erudilion.

to

before

I make my own judgment.
6

I ... speak ... slowly ... when talking
whieh ... almosl ... everyone ... is

to idiolS,
eompared

.
.

to me.

7

I am horribly, horribly awkward in social situalions.

8

I'm eonvineed thal people are always trying to steal my
secrets.

d6

Ideal

1

Knowledge. The path to power and self-improvement

2

is through knowledge. (Neutral)
Beauty. What is beautiful points us beyond itself

3

toward what is true. (Good)
logie. Emotions must not c10ud our logieal lhinking.
(lawful)

4

No Limits. Nothing should fetter the infinite possibility
inherent in ali existenee. ((haotie)

S

Power. Knowledge is the path to power and
domination. (Evil)

6

Self.lmprovement.
The goal of a life of study is the
betterment of oneself. (Any)

d6

Bond

1
2

It is my duty to proteet my students.
I have an aneient text that holds terrible secrets that

3

must not fali into the wrong hands.
I work to preserve a library, university, scriptorium,
ar monastery.

4

My life's work is a series of tomes related to a speeifie
field of lore.

S

I've been searehing

6

certa in questiono
I sold my sou I for knowledge.

my whole life for the answer to a
I hope to do great deeds

and win it baek.
d6

Flaw

1

I am easily distraeted

2

Most people scream and run when they see a demon.

3

stop and take notes on its anatomy.
Unloeking an aneient mystery is worth the priee of a

by the promise of information.

civilization.

4

I overlook obvious solutions

in favor of eomplieated

ones.

S

I speak without really thinking through

6

invariably insulting others.
I ean't keep a seeret to save my life, or anyone else's.

my words,

I

SAILOR

d6

Vou sailed on a seagoing vessel for years. In that
time, you faced down mighty storms, monsters of the
deep, and those who wanted to sink your craft to the
bottomless depths. Your first love is the distant line of
the horizan, but the time has come to try your hand
at something new.
Discuss the nature of the ship you previously sailed
with your Dungeon Master. Was it a merchant ship,
a naval vessel, a ship of discovery, or a pirate ship?
How famous (or infamous) is it? Is it widely traveled?
Is it stiII sailing, or is it missing and presumed lost
with ali hands?
What were your duties on board-boatswain,
capta in,
navigator, cook, or some other position? Who were the
captain and first mate? Did you leave your ship on good
terms with your fellows, or on the run?

1

Respecl. The Ihing Ihal keeps a ship logelher is mulual

2

respecl belween caplain and crew. (Good)
Fairness. We ali do lhe work, so we ali share in lhe

Skill Proficiencies:
Athletics, Perception
Tool Proficiencies:
Navigator's tools, vehides (water)
Equipment:
A belaying pin (dub), 50 feet of silk rope,
a lucky charm such as a rabbit foot or a small stone
with a hole in the center (or you may roll for a random
trinket on the Trinkets table in chapter 5), a set of
common dothes, and a belt pouch containing
10 gp
FEATURE: SHIP'S PASSAGE
When you need to, you can secure free passage on
a sailing ship for yourself and your adventuring
companions.
Vou might sail on the ship you served on,
or another ship you have good relations with (perhaps
one captained bya former crewmate). Because you're
calling in a favor, you can't be certain of a schedule or
route that wiII meet your every need. Your Dungeon
Master wiII determine how long it takes to get where
you need to go. In return for your free passage, you
and your companions
are expected to assist the crew
during the voyage.
SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Sailors can be a rough lot, but the responsibilities
of
life on a ship make them generally reliable as welI. Life
aboard a ship shapes their outlook and forms their most
important attachments.
d8

Personalily Trail

1
2

My friends know they can rely on me, no matter what.
I work hard so that I can play hard when lhe work
is done.
I enjoy sailing inlo new porls and making new friends

4
5
6
7
8

over a flagon of ale.
I slrelch lhe Irulh for lhe sake of a good slory.
To me, a lavem brawl is a nice way lo gel lo know a
new cily.
I never pass up a friendly wager.
My language is as foul as an olyugh nesl.
Ilike a job well done, especially if I can convince
someone else lo do il.

Ideal

rewards. (Lawful)
3
4

Freedom. The sea is freedom-Ihe
freedom lo go
anywhere and do anything. (Chaolic)
Maslery. I'm a predalor, and lhe olher ships on lhe sea

5

are my prey. (Evil)
People. I'm committed lo my crewmales, not lo ideais.

6

(Neulral)
Aspiralion. Someday 1'11 own my own ship and charl
my own desliny. (Any)

d6

Bond

1

I'm loyal lo my captain first, everything else second.

2

The ship is mosl important-crewmates

3
4

come and go.
1'11always remember my firsl ship.
In a harbor lown, I have a paramour whose eyes nearly

5
6

and caplains

slole me from lhe sea.
I was chealed oul of my fair share of lhe profils, and I
wanl lo gel my due.
Rulhless pirales murdered my caplain and crewmales,
plundered our ship, and lefl me lo die. Vengeance will
be mine.

d6

Flaw

1
2
3

I follow orders, even if I Ihink Ihey're wrong.
1'11say anylhing lo avoid having lo do exlra work.
Once someone queslions my courage, I never back

4

down no maller how dangerous lhe silualion.
Once I slarl drinking, il's hard for me lo slop.

5

I can'l help but pockel loose coins and olher Irinkels I

6

come across.
My pride will probably lead lo my deslruclion.

VARIANT SAILOR: PIRATE
Vou spent your youlh under the sway of a dread pirate,
a ruthless cutthroat who taught you how to survive in a
worId of sharks and savages. You've indulged in larceny
on the high seas and sent more than one deserving soul
to a briny grave. Fear and bloodshed are no strangers
to you, and you've garnered a somewhal unsavory
reputation in many a port town.
If you decide thal your sailing career involved piracy,
you can choose the Bad Reputalion feature (see sidebar)
instead of the Ship's Passage feature.

••

•••
VARIANT

FEATURE:

BAD

REPUTATION

If your characler has a sai lor background, you may selecl Ihis
background fealure inslead ofShip's Passage.
No malter where you go, people are afraid of you due lo
your repulalion. When you are in a civilized seltlement, you
can gel away wilh minor criminal offenses, such as refusing
to pay for food at a tavern ar breaking down doors at a local

shop, since mosl people will nol reporl your aclivily lo lhe
aulhorilies.

••

PART

1

PERSONALlTY

ANO

BACKGROUNO

••
[39

SOLDIER
War has been your !ife for as long as you care to
remember. Vou trained as a youth, studied the use of
weapons and armor, learned basic survival techniques,
including how to stay a!ive on the battlefield. Vou
might have been part of a standing national army or a
mercenary company, or perhaps a member of a local
militia who rose to prominence during a recent war.
When you choose this background, work with your
DM to determine which military organization you were
a part of, how far through its ranks you progressed, and
what kind of experiences you had during your mi!itary
career. Was it a standing army, a town guard, or a village
militia? Or it might have been a noble's or merchant's
private army, or a mercenary company.
Skill Proficiencies: Athletics, Intimidation
TooI Proficiencies: One type of gaming set,
vehicles (Iand)
Equiprnent: An insignia of rank, a trophy taken from
a fallen enemy (a dagger, broken blade, or piece of a
banner), a set of bone dice or deck of cards, a set of
common clothes, and a beIt pouch containing 10 gp

SPECIALTY

During your time as a soldier, you had a specific role to
pIay in your unit or army. Roll a d8 or choose from the
options in the table below to determine your role:
d8

Specially

d8

Specially

1

Officer

Quartermasler

2

3

Scoul
Infanlry

6
7
8

4

Cavalry

Supporl slaff (cook,
blacksmilh, or lhe

5

Healer

like)

FEATURE:

MILITARY

Standard

bearer

RANK

Vou have a military rank from your career as a soldier.
SoIdiers loyal to your former military organization
still recognize your authority and inftuence, and they
defer to you if they are of a Iower rank. Vou can invoke
your rank to exert inftuence over other soldiers and
requisition simple equipment or horses for temporary
use. Vou can aIso usually gain access to friendly
military encampments and fortresses where your
rank is recognized.
SUGGESTED

CHARACTERISTICS

The horrors of war combined with the rigid discipline of
military service leave their mark on ali soldiers, shaping
their ideais, creating strong bonds, and often leaving
them scarred and vuInerable to fear, shame, and hatred.
d8

Personalily Trail

1

I'm always polite and respectfu!'

2

I'm haunled by memories of war. I can't gel lhe images
of violence oul of my mind.
I've lost too many friends, and I'm slow lo make new
one$.

4

I'm full ofinspiring
mililary experience

and caulionary lales from my
relevant to almosl every combat

situation.

5

I can stare down a hell hound without flinching.

6
7
8

I enjoy being slrong and like breaking lhings.
I have a crude sense of humor.
I face problems head.on. A simple, direcl solulion is
lhe besl path to success.

d6

Ideal

1

Grealer Good. Our 101 is lo lay down our lives in

2

defense of others. (Good)
Responsibilily. I do what I must and obey just

3

authorily. (Lawful)
Independence. When people follow orders blindly, they

4
5
6

embrace a kind of tyranny. (Chaolic)
Might. In life as in war, the slronger force wins. (Evil)
Live and Let Live. Ideais aren't worth killing over or
going to war for. (Neutral)
Nalion. My city, nalion, or people are allthal malter.
(Any)

d6

Bond

d8

Personalily Trail

1

I would stilllay down my life for the people I

1

I hide scraps offood and lrinkels away in my pockets.

served with.

2
3

I ask a lot of queslions.
I like lo squeeze inlo small places where no one else
can gello me.

4

I sleep wilh my back to a wall or tree, with everylhing I

2
3

Someone saved my life on the battlefield. To this day, I
will never leave a friend behind.
My honor is my life.

4

1'11 never forget the crushing defeat my company

own wrapped in a bundle in my arms.

suffered or the enemies who dealt il.

S

I eat like a pig and have bad manners.

S
6

Those who fight beside me are those worth dying for.
I fight for those who cannot fight for themselves.

6
7

I think anyone who's nice to me is hiding evil intento
I don't like to bathe.

8

I blunlly say what olher people are hinling aI ar hiding.

d6

Flaw

1

The monstrous enemy we faced in battle stillleaves

d6

Ideal

1

2

me quivering with fear.
I have little respect for anyone who is not a

Respecl. Ali people, rich ar poor, deserve respect.
(Good)

proven warrior.

2

Communily. We have to take care of each other,

3

I made a terrible mistake in battle cost many lives3

because no one else is going to do il. (Lawful)
Change. The low are lifted up, and the high and mighty

4
S

and I would do anything to keep that mistake secrel.
My hatred of my enemies is blind and unreasoning.
I obey the law, even if the law causes misery.

6

I'd rather eat my armor than admit when I'm wrong.

4

are brought down. Change is the nature oflhings.
.
(Chaolic)
Relribulion. The rich need to be shown what life and
death are like in the gutters. (Evil)

URCHIN
Vou grew up on the streets alone, orphaned, and poor.
Vou had no one to watch over you or to provide for
you, so you learned to provide for yourself. Vou fought
fiercely over food and kept a constant watch out for other
desperate souls who might steal from you. Vou slept on
rooftops and in alleyways, exposed to the elements, and
endured sickness without the advantage of medicine or
a place to recuperate.
You've survived despi te ali odds,
and did so through cunning, strength, speed, or some
combination
of each.
Vou begin your adventuring career with enough
money to live modestly but securely for at least ten days.
How did you come by that money? What allowed you to
break free of your desperate circumstances
and embark
on a better life?
Skill Proficiencies:
Sleight of Hand, Stealth
Tool Proficiencies:
Disguise kit, thieves' tools
Equiprnent:
A small knife, a map of the city you
grew up in, a pet mouse, a token to remember your
parents by, a set of common clothes, and a belt pouch
containing
10 gp
FEATURE:

CITY SECRETS

Vou know the secret patterns and flow to cities and can
find passages through the urban sprawl that others would
miss. When you are not in combat, you (and companions
you lead) can travei between any two locations in the city
twice as fast as your speed would normally allow.

S

People. I help the people who help me-that's

6

keeps us alive. (Neutral)
Aspiration. I'm going to prove that I'm worthy of a

what

better life.
d6

Bond

1
2

My town ar city is my home, and 1'11fight to defend il.
I sponsor an orphanage to keep others from enduring
what I was forced to endure.

3

I owe my survival to another urchln who taught me to
live on the streets.

4

I owe a debt I can never repay to the person who took
pity on me.
I escaped my life of poverty by robbing an important

S

person, and I'm wanted for il.
6

No one else should have to endure the hardships I've
been through.

d6

Flaw

1

If I'm outnumbered,

2

Gold seems like a lot of money to me, and 1'11 do just
about anything for more of il.

I will run away from a fighl.

3

I will never fully trust anyone other than myself.

4

I'd rather kill someone in their sleep then fight fair.

S
6

It's not stealing if I need It more than someone else.
People who can't take care of themselves get what they
deserve.

SUGGESTED CHARACTERISTICS
Urchins are shaped by lives of desperate poverty, for
good and for ill. They tend to be driven either by a
commitment
to the people with whom they shared life
00 the street or by a burning
desire to find a better lifeand maybe get some payback on ali the rich people who
treated them badly.

PART 1 I PERSONALlTY A.

o BACKGROU '0

CHAPTER
~

5: EQUIPMENT

HE MARKETPLACE

OF A LARCE CITY TEEMS

with buyers and sellers of many sorts:
dwarf smiths and elf woodcarvers, halfling
farmers and gnome jewelers, not to mention
humans of every shape, size, and color
drawn fram a spectrum of nations and
cultures. In the largest cities, almost
anything imaginable is offered for sale, fram exotic
spices and luxurious clothing to wicker baskets and
practical swords.
For an adventurer, the availability of armor, weapons,
backpacks, rape, and similar goods is of paramount
importance, since praper equipmenl can mean lhe
difference belween life and dealh in a dungeon or the
unlamed wilds. This chapter delails the mundane and
exolic merchandise lhal adventurers commonly find useful
in lhe face of lhe lhreats lhal the worlds of 0&0 present.

STARTING EQUIPMENT
When you creale your characler, you receive equipment
based on a combinalion of your class and background.
Alternatively, you can starl with a number of gold pieces
based on your class and spend them on items fram lhe
lisls in this chapter. See the Slarling Weallh by Class
table lo determine how much gold you have lo spend.
Vou decide how your characler carne by lhis starting
equipment. II mighl have been an inherilance, or goods
lhat the characler purchased during his or her upbringing.
Vou might have been equipped with a weapon, armor, and
a backpack as part of military service. Vou mighl even have
stolen your gear. A weapon could be a family heirloom,
passed down fram generalion lOgeneralion unlil your
characler finally look up lhe mantle and followed in an
anceslor's advenlurous footsteps.
STARTlNG

WEALTH

Class
Barbarian
Bard
Cleric
Druid
Fighter
Monk
Paladin
Ranger
Rogue
Sorcerer

Warlock
Wizard

BY CLASS

Funds
2d4 x 10 gp
5d4 x 10 gp
5d4 x 10 gp
2d4 x 10 gp
5d4 x 10 gp
5d4 gp
5d4xl0gp
5d4xl0gp
4d4x10gp

Members of lhe nobilily lrade eilher in legal righls, such
as lhe righls lo a mine, a porl, or farmland, or in gold
bars, measuring gold by lhe pound ralher than by lhe
coin. Only merchanls, advenlurers, and lhose offering
prafessional services for hire commonly deal in coins.

COINAGE
Common coins come in several differenl denominalions
based on lhe relalive worlh of the melai fram which lhey
are made. The lhree mosl common coins are lhe gold
piece (gp), lhe silver piece (sp), and lhe copper piece (cp).
Wilh one gold piece, a character can buy a belt
pouch, 50 feel of good rape, or a goat. A skilled (bUl
nol exceplional) arlisan can earn one gold piece a day.
The gold piece is lhe slandard unil of measure for
weallh, even if lhe coin ilself is nol commonly used.
When merchanls discuss deals lhal involve goods or
services worlh hundreds or thousands of gold pieces,
lhe lransaclions don'l usually involve lhe exchange of
individual coins. Ralher, lhe gold piece is a standard
measure of value, and lhe aclual exchange is in gold
bars, letters of credil, or valuable goods.
One gold piece is worlh len silver pieces, the mosl
prevalenl coin among commoners. A silver piece buys a
laborer's work for a day, a flask of lamp oil, or a night's
rest in a poor inn.
One silver piece is worlh len copper pieces, which are
common among laborers and beggars. A single copper
piece buys a candle, a lorch, or a piece of chalk.
In addition, unusual coins made of other precious
metais somelimes appear in lreasure hoards. The
eleclrum piece (ep) and lhe plalinum piece (pp) originale
from fallen empires and losl kingdoms, and lhey
sometimes arause suspicion and skepticism when used
in lransactions. An eleclrum piece is worth five silver
pieces, and a plalinum piece is worlh len gold pieces.
A standard coin weighs about a lhird of an ounce,
so fifty coins weigh a pound.
STANDARD

EXCHANGE

RATES

Coin

cp

sp

ep

gp

pp

Copper (cp)
Silver (sp)

1

1/10
1

l/50

1/100

1/1,000

1/5
1

1/10

1/100

5

1/20

10

2

100

20

1/2
1
10

Eleclrum (ep)
Gold (gp)
Platinum (pp)

10
50
100
1,000

1/10
1

3d4 x 10 gp
4d4 x 10 gp
4d4 x 10 gp

WEALTH
Weallh appears in many forms in a 0&0 world. Coins,
gemslones, lrade goods, art objecls, animais, and
praperly can reftecl your characler's financiai well-being.
Members of lhe peasanlry trade in goods, barlering for
whal lhey need and paying laxes in grain and cheese.

PART

I

EQUIPME.

T

143

SELLING TREASURE
Opportunities abound to find treasure, equipment,
weapons, armar, and more in the dungeons you explore.
Normally, you can sell your treasures and trinkets when
you return to a town ar other setllement, provided that you
can find buyers and merchants interested in your 1001.
Arms, Armor, and Other Equipment. As a general
rule, undamaged weapons, armar, and other equipment
fetch half their cost when sold in a market. Weapons
and armor used by monsters are rarely in good enough
condition to sell.
Magic Items. Selling magic items is prablematic.
Finding someone to buy a potion or a scroll isn't toa
hard, but other ilems are out of the realm of most but the
wealthiest nobles. Likewise, aside fram a few common
magic items, you won't normally come across magic
items ar spells to purchase. The value of magic is far
beyond simple gold and should always be treated as such.
Gems,jewe1ry, and Art Objects. These items retain
their full value in the marketplace, and you can either
trade them in for coin ar use them as currency for other
lransactions. For exceptionally valuable treasures, the
DM might require you to find a buyer in a large town ar
larger community first.
Trade Goods. On the borderlands, many people
conduct transactions through barter. Like gems and art
objects, trade goods-bars of iran, bags of salt, Iivestock,
and so on-relain lheir full value in the market and can
be used as currency.

ARMOR AND SHIELDS
D&D worlds are a vast tapestry made up of many
different cultures, each with its own technology leveI.
For this reason, adventurers have access to a variety
of armor types, ranging from leather armor to chain
mail to costly plate armar, with several other kinds of
armor in between. The Armor table collects the most
commonly available types of armar found in the game
and separates them into three calegories: light armor,
medium armar, and heavy armar. Many warriors
supplement their armar with a shield.

••

VARIANT:

EQUIPMENT

SIZES

••

PART 1 I EQUIPMENT

LIGHTARMOR
Made fram supple and thin materiais, light armor favors
agile adventurers since it offers some pratection without
sacrificing mobility. If you wear light armar, you add
your Dexterity modifier to the base number from your
armar type to determine your Armar Class.
Padded. Padded armar consists of quilted layers of
cloth and batting.
Leather. The breastplate and shoulder protectors of
this armor are made of leather that has been stiffened
by being boiled in oil. The rest of the armar is made of
softer and more flexible materiaIs.
Studded Leather. Made from tough but flexible
leather, studded leather is reinforced with close-set
rivets ar spikes .

MEDIUM ARMOR

In most campaigns, you can use ar wear any equipment that
you find on your adventures, within the bounds of common
sense. For example, a burly haif.orc won't fit in a halfling's
leather armar, and a gnome would be swallowed up in a
c10ud giant's elegant robe.
The DM can impose more realism. For example, a suit of
plate armar made for one human might not fit another one
without significant alterations, and a guard's uniform mighl
be visibly ill.fitting when an adventurer tries to wear it as a
disguise.
Using this variant, when adventurers find armar, c1othing.
and similar items that are made to be worn, they might need
to visit an armorsmith, tailor, leatherworker, ar similar exper!
to make the item wearable. The cost for such work varies
from 10 to 40 percent ofthe market price ofthe item. The
DM can either rollld4 x 10 ar determine the increase in cost
based on the extent of the alterations required.
••••
---------------------

The Armar table shows the cost, weight, and other
properties of the common lypes of armor worn in the
worlds of D&D.
Armor Proficiency. Anyone can put on a suit of armar
ar strap a shield to an armo Only those praficient in the
armor's use know how to wear it effectively, however.
Your class gives you praficiency with certain types of
armor.lfyou wear armor that you lack proficiency with,
you have disadvantage on any ability check, saving
thraw, ar atlack roll that involves Strength or Dexterity,
and you can't cast spells.
Armor Class (AC). Armar protects its wearer fram
atlacks. The armar (and shield) you wear determines
your base Armar Class.
Heavy Armor. Heavier armor interferes with the
wearer's ability to move quickly, stealthily, and freely.
lf the Armor table shows "Str 13" ar "Str 15" in the
Strength column for an armar type, the armar reduces
the wearer's speed by 10 feet unless the wearer has a
Strength score equal to or higher than the listed score.
Stealth. lf the Armar table shows "Disadvanlage" in
the Stealth column, the wearer has disadvantage on
Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
Shields. A shield is made fram wood ar metal and
is carried in one hand. Wielding a shield increases
your Armar Class by 2. Vou can benefit from only one
shield at a time.

r
•.

Medium armar offers more pratection than light armar,
but il also impairs movement more.lfyou wear medium
armor, you add your Dexlerity modifier, to a maximum
of +2, to the base number fram your armor type to
determine your Armar Class.
Hide. This crude armor consists of thick furs and
pelts. lt is commonly worn by barbarian tribes, evil
humanoids, and other folk who lack access to the tools
and materiaIs needed lOcreate betler armor.
Chain Shirt. Made of interlocking metal rings, a chain
shirl is worn belween layers of clothing ar leather. This
armor offers modest protection to the wearer's upper
body and allows lhe sound of the rings rubbing against
one another to be muffled by outer layers.
ScaleMail.This armar consists of a coat and leggings
(and perhaps a separate skirt) of leather covered with

overlapping pieces of metal, much like the scales of a
fish, The suit includes gauntlets,
Breastp/ate. This armor consists of a fitted metal
chest piece worn with supple leather, Although it leaves
the legs and arms relatively unprotected, this armor
provides good protection for the wearer's vital organs
while leaving the wearer relatively unencumbered,
Ha/fP/ate. Half plate consists of shaped metal plates
that cover most of the wearer's body, 1tdoes not include
leg protection beyond simple greaves that are attached
with leather straps.

HEAVY ARMOR
Of al1 the armor categories, heavy armor offers the best
protection. These suits of armor cover the entire body
and are designed to stop a wide range of attacks. Only
proficient warriors can manage their weight and bulk.
Heavy armor doesn't let you add your Dexterity
modifier to your Armor Class, but it also doesn't
penalize you if your Dexterity modifier is nega tive.
Ring Mail. This armor is leather armor with heavy
rings sewn into it. The rings he1p reinforce the armor
against blows from swords and axes. Ring mail is
inferior to chain mail, and it"s usual1y worn only by those
who can't afford better armor.
Chain Mail. Made of interlocking metal rings, chain
mail includes a layer of quilted fabric worn underneath
themail to prevent chafing and to cushion the impact of
blows. The suit includes gauntlets.
Splint. This armor is made of narrow vertical strips
of metal riveted to a backing of leather that is worn over
c10th padding. Flcxible chain mail protects the joints.
P/ate. Plate consists of shaped, interlocking metal
plates to cover the entire body. A suit of plate includes
gauntlets, heavy leather boots, a visored helmet, and
thick layers of padding underneath the armor. Buckles
and straps distribute the weight over the body.

ARMOR

Armor

Cost

Armor Class (AC)

Padded

5 gp

11 + Dex modifier

Leather

10 gp
45 gp

11 + Dex modifier

101b.

12 + Dex modifier

13lb.

Strength

Stealth

Weight

Light Armor

Studded leather
Medium Armor
Hide
Chain shirt
Seale mai!
Breastplate
Half plate
HeavyArmor
Ring mail
Chain mail
Splint
Plate
Shield
Shield

10 gp
50 gp
50 gp
400 gp
750 gp

12 + Dex modifier
13 + Dex modifier
14 + Dex modifier
14 + Dex modifier

Disadvantage

(max 2)
(ma x 2)
(max 2)
(max 2)

121b.
201b.

15 + Dex modifier (max 2)

30 gp
75 gp
200 gp
1,500 gp

16
17
18

10 gp

+2

81b.

14
Str 13
Str 15
Str 15

Disadvantage

451b.
201b.

Disadvantage

401b.

Disadvantage
Disadvantage

401b.
551b.
601b.

Disadvantage
Disadvantage

651b.
61b.

PART 1

EQUIPMENT

'45

GETTING INTo

AND OUT OF ARMOR

The lime il lakes lo don or doff armor depends on lhe
armor's calegory.
Don. This is lhe lime it takes lo pul on armor. Vou
benefil from lhe armor's AC only if you lake lhe full lime
lOdon lhe suil of armor.
Dolf. This is lhe lime il lakes lo lake off armor. lf you
have help, reduce lhis time by half.
DONNING

ANO DOFFING

ARMOR

Oon

Ooff

Lighl Armor

1 minute

1 minute

Medium Armor

5 minutes

1 minute

Heavy Armor

10 minutes

5 minutes

Shield

1 action

1 action

Category

WEAPONS
Your class granls proficiency in cerlain weapons,
reflecling boIh lhe class's focus and lhe lools you are
mosl likely lo use. Whelher you favor a longsword or
a longbow, your weapon and your abilily lo wield il
effeclively can mean lhe difference belween tife and
dealh while advenluring.
The Weapons lable shows lhe mosl common weapons
used in lhe worlds of 0&0, lheir price and weighl,
lhe damage lhey deal when lhey hil, and any special
properlies lhey possesso Every weapon is classified
as eilher melee or ranged. A melee weapon is used lo
attack a largel wilhin 5 feel of you, whereas a ranged
weapon is used lo attack a largel aI a dislance.

WEAPON PROFICIENCY
Your race, class, and feals can granl you proficiency
wilh cerlain weapons or calegories of weapons. The lwo
calegories are simple and martial. Mosl people can
use sim pIe weapons wilh proficiency. These weapons
include clubs, maces, and olher weapons oflen found in
lhe hands of commoners. Marlial weapons, including
swords, axes, and polearms, require more speciatized
lraining lOuse effeclively. Mosl warriors use marlial
weapons because lhese weapons pul their fighling slyle
and lraining lo besl use.
Proficiency wilh a weapon allows you lo add your
proficiency bonus lo lhe atlack roll for any attack you
make wilh lhat weapon. If you make an atlack roll using
a weapon wilh which you lack proficiency, you do nol
add your proficiency bonus lo lhe atlack roll.

WEAPON PROPERTIES
Many weapons have special properlies relaled lo lheir use,
as shown in lhe Weapons lable.
Ammunition. Vou can use a weapon lhal has lhe
ammunilion properly lo make a ranged attack only if
you have ammunilion lo fire from lhe weapon. Each
time you atlack wilh lhe weapon, you expend one piece
of ammunilion. Orawing lhe ammunition from a quiver,
case, or olher conlainer is parI of lhe atlack. AI lhe
end of lhe baltle, you can recover half your expended
ammunilion by laking a minule lo search lhe battlefield.

PART I

I EQUIPMENT

If you use a weapon that has the ammunition property
to make a melee attack, you treat the weapon as an
improvised weapon (see "Improvised Weapons" later in
the section). A sling must be loaded to deal any damage
when used in this way.
Finesse. When making an attack with a finesse
weapon, you use your choice of your Strength or
Dexterity modifier for the attack and damage rolls. Vou
must use the same modifier for both rolls.
Heavy. Small creatures have disadvantage on attack
rolls with heavy weapons. A heavy weapon's size and
bulk make it toa large for a Small creature to use
effectively.
Light. A light weapon is small and easy to handle,
making it ideal for use when fighting with two weapons.
See the rules for two-weapon fighting in chapter 9.
Loading. Because of the time required to load this
weapon, you can fire only one piece of ammunition
from it when you use an action, bonus action, or reaction
to fire it, regardless of the number of attacks you can
normally make.
Range. A weapon that can be used to make a ranged
attack has a range shown in parentheses after the
ammunition or thrown property. The range lists two
numbers. The first is the weapon's normal range in feet,
and the second indicates the weapon's maximum range.
When attacking a target beyond normal range, you have
disadvantage on the attack rol I. Vou can't attack a target
beyond the weapon's long range.
Reach. This weapon adds 5 feet to your reach when
you attack with it.
Special. A weapon with the special property has
unusual rules governing its use, explained in the
weapon's description (see "Special Weapons" later in
this section).
Thrown. If a weapon has the thrown property, you
can throw the weapon to make a ranged attack. If the
weapon is a melee weapon, you use the same ability
modifier for that attack roll and damage roll that you
would use for a melee attack with the weapon. For
example, ifyou throw a handaxe, you use your Strength,
but if you throw a dagger, you can use either your
Strength or your Dexterity, since the dagger has the
finesse property.
Two.Handed. This weapon requires two hands to use.
Versatile. This weapon can be used with one or two
hands. A damage value in parentheses appears with the
property-the damage when the weapon is used with
two hands to make a melee attack.
IMPROVISED

"

.

WEAPONS

Sometimes characters don't have their weapons and
have to attack with whatever is dose at hand. An
improvised weapon indudes any object you can wield
in one or two hands, such as broken glass, a table leg, a
frying pan, a wagon wheel, or a dead goblin.
In many cases, an improvised weapon is similar
to an actual weapon and can be treated as such. For
example, a table leg is akin to a dub. At the DM's option.
a character proficient with a weapon can use a similar

object as if it were that weapon and use his or her
proficiency bonus.

/-

PART 1

EQUIPMENT

147

An object that bears no resemblance to a weapon
deals ld4 damage (the DM assigns a damage type
appropriate to the object). Ir a characler uses a ranged
weapon lo make a melee atlack, or throws a melee
weapon that does not have the thrown property, it also
deals ld4 damage. An improvised thrown weapon has a
normal range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet.
SILVERED WEAPONS

Some monsters that have immunity or resistance
to nonmagical weapons are susceptible to silver
weapons, so caulious adventurers invest extra coin to
plate their weapons with silver. Vou can silver a single
weapon or ten pieces of ammunition for 100 gp. This
cost represents not only the price of the silver, but the
time and expertise needed to add silver to the weapon
without making it less effective.
SPECIAL WEAPONS

Weapons with special rules are described here.
Lance. Vou have disadvantage when you use a lance
to attack a target within 5 feet of you. Also, a lance
requires two hands to wield when you aren't mounted.
Net. A Large or smaller creature hit by a net is
restrained until it is freed. A net has no effect on

'4.8

PART 1 I EQUIPMENT

creatures that are formless, or creatures that are Huge
or larger. A creature can use its action to make a DC 10
Strength check, freeing itself or another creature within
its reach on a success. Dealing 5 slashing damage to the
net (AC 10) also frees the creature without harming it,
ending the effect and destroying the net.
When you use an action, bonus action, or reaction
to atlack with a net, you can make only one attack
regardless of the number of attacks you can
normally make.

AnVENTURING

GEAR

This section describes items that have special rules or
require further explanation.
Acid. As an action, you can splash the contents of
this vial onto a creature within 5 feet of you or throw
the vial up to 20 feet, shattering it on impact. In either
case, make a ranged attack against a creature or object,
treating the acid as an improvised weapon. On a hit, the
target takes 2d6 acid damage.
Alchemist's Fire. This sticky, adhesive fluid ignites
when exposed to air. As an action, you can throw this
flask up to 20 feet, shattering it on impact. Make a
ranged attack against a creature or object, treating

Name

Weight

Properties

Cost

Damage

Club
Dagger
Greatclub

1 sp
2 gp
2sp

1d4 piercing
1d8 bludgeoning

101b.

Handaxe

5 gp

1d6slashing

21b.

Light, thrown (range 20/60)

Javelin
Light hammer

5 sp
2 gp

1d6 piercing

21b.

1d4 bludgeoning

21b.

Thrown (range 30/120)
Light, thrown (range 20/60)

Mace
Quarterstaff

5 gp
2sp

1d6 bludgeoning
1d6 bludgeoning

41b.
41b.

Versatile (1d8)

Sickle

1 gp

1d4 slashing

21b.

Spear
Unarmed

1 gp

1d6 piercing
1 bludgeoning

3 Ib.

Light
Thrown (range 20/60), versatile

25 gp

ld8 piercing

51b.

Ammunition

Simp!e Melee Weapons

strike

Simp!e Ranged Weapons
Crossbow, light

1d4 bludgeoning

21b.
1 Ib.

Light
Finesse, light, thrown (range 20/60)
Two-handed

(range 80/320), loading, two.handed

Finesse, thrown (range 20/60)
Ammunition (range 80/320), two.handed

5 cp
25 gp
1 sp

1d4 piercing
1d6 piercing
1d4 bludgeoning

1/4Ib.
21b.

Battleaxe
Flail

10 gp
10 gp

1d8slashing
1d8 bludgeoning

41b.
21b.

Versatile (ld10)

Glaive
Greataxe

20 gp
30 gp

1dl O slashing
1d12 slashing

Greatsword

50 gp
20 gp
10 gp

2d6slashing
1d10 slashing
1d12 piercing

61b.
71b.
61b.

Heavy, reach, two-handed
Heavy, two-handed
Heavy, two.handed
Heavy, reach, two.handed
Reach, special

15 gp
10 gp

1d8 slashing
2d6 bludgeoning

61b.
61b.
31b.

Morningstar
Pike
Rapier

15 gp
5 gp
25 gp

1d8 piercing
1d10 piercing
1d8 piercing

Scimitar
Shortsword
Trident
War pick

25 gp
10 gp
5 gp
5 gp
15 gp

1d6slashing
1d6 piercing
ld6 piercing

Dart
Shortbow
Sling
Martia! Melee Weapons

Halberd
Lance
Longsword
Maul

Warhammer

Whip
Martial Ranged Weapons
Blowgun
Crossbow, hand
Crossbow, heavy
Longbow
Ne!

2 gp

ld8 piercing
1d8 bludgeoning
1d4slashing

Ammunition

101b.
41b.

(ld8)

(range 30/120)

Versatile (ldl0)
Heavy, two.handed

181b.
21b.

Heavy, reach, two.handed

31b.
21b.
41b.
21b.
21b.

Finesse, light

Finesse

Finesse, light
Thrown (range 20/60), versatile

(ld8)

Versatile (ld10)

31b.

Finesse, reach
Ammunition
Ammunition

(range 25/100), loading
(range 30/120), light, loading

Ammunition

(range 100/400),

10 gp
75 gp
50 gp

1 piercing

11b.

1d6 piercing
1dlO piercing

31b.
181b.

50 gp
1 gp

1d8 piercing

21b.
31b.

Ammunition (range 150/600),
Special, thrown (range 5/15)

heavy, loading, two.handed
heavy, two-handed

PARl

I

EQUIPMENT

149

Item

Item

Cost

Weight

Abacus
Acid (vial)
Alchemist's

2 gp
25 gp
50 gp

21b.

Ho/y symbo/

1 Ib.
1 Ib.

Amulet
Emblem

1 gp

1 Ib.
llb.

fire (flask)

Ammunition
Arrows (20)
Blowgun needles (50)
Crossbow bolts (20)
Sling bullets (20)
Antitoxin (vial)

1 gp
1 gp
4 cp

1'/2 Ib.
1'/2 Ib.

50 gp

Arcane Jocus
Crystal
Orb

10 gp
20 gp

Rod
Staff
Wand

10 gp
5 gp
10 gp

Backpack
Ball bearings
Barrei

(bag of 1 000)

Book
Botlle, glass
Bucket
(bag of 20)

Candle
Case, crossbow

bolt

Case, map or scroll
Chain (10 feet)
Chalk (l piece)
Chest
Climber's kit
Clothes, common
Clothes, costume
Clothes, fine
Clothes, traveler's
Component

pouch

Crowbar

51b.

5 cp

21b.

Poison, basic (vial)

1 gp
1 cp

21b.

Pole (10-foot)

1 gp
1 gp

1 Ib.
llb.
10 Ib.

5 gp
15 gp
2 gp
25 gp
2 gp

Pot, iron

61b.
41b.
21b.
51b.

1 gp

251b.

2 cp
2 cp
1 sp

100 gp
2 gp
2 sp

Piek, miner's
Piton

121b.
31b.
41b.

1 Ib.

5 gp
10 gp

Magnifying glass
Manacles
Mess kit
Mirror, steel

51b.
21b.

Polion oJhealing
Pouch
Quiver
Ram, portable
Rations (l day)
Robes

5 gp
1 sp
2 sp
1 sp
5 gp
2 gp

101b.

5 cp

1/4Ib.

100 gp
5 cp
2 gp
50 gp
5 sp
1 gp

Rope, hempen (50 feet)
Rope, silk (50 feet)

4 gp
5 sp
1 gp
1 gp
10 gp

Sack
Scale, merchant's

5 gp

Sealing wax
Shovel
Signal whistle
Signe! ring

21b.
llb.

25 gp

5 gp
10 gp

25 gp
2 gp

5 gp
25 gp
5 sp

1 Ib.

Lantern, hooded
Lock

1 gp

251b.

5 gp
5 gp
5 gp
25 gp

5 sp
10 gp

Paper (one sheet)
Parchment (one sheet)
Perfume (vial)

5 gp
1 cp

Weight

Jug or pitcher
Ladder (10-foot)
Lamp
Lantern, bullseye

31b.
51b.

Druidic Jocus
Sprig of mistletoe

Ink (1 ounce bottle)
Ink pen

Oil (flask)

1 gp
5 sp

Blanket
Block and tackle

llb.

Hourglass
Hunting trap

21b.
701b.
21b.
71b.

2 gp
4 sp
1 gp

Basket
Bedroll
Bell

Caltrops

2 gp
1 gp

llb.
31b.
21b.
41b.

Reliquary
Holy water (flask)

Cost

1 cp
5 sp
2 gp
5 cp
5 gp

Totem

1 gp

Soap

2 cp

Wooden staff

5 gp

41b.

Spellbook

50 gp

31b.

Yew wand

10 gp

1 Ib.

Spikes, iron (10)

1 gp

Fishing tackle

1 gp

41b.

Spyglass

51b.
llb.

Flask or tankard
Grappling hook

2 cp
2 gp

1 Ib.
41b.

Tent, two-person
Tinderbox

1 gp

31b.

Torch

1 cp

2 gp
5 gp

101b.

Vial

1 gp

31b.

Waterskin
Whetstone

2 sp
1 cp

Hammer

PART I

I EQUIPMENT

1,000 gp
2 gp
5 sp

201b.
llb.
llb.

the alchemist's tire as an improvised weapon. On a
hit, the target takes Id4 tire damage at the start of
each of its turns. A creature can end this damage by
using its action to make a DC 10 Dexterity check to
extinguish the liames.
Antitoxin. A creature that drinks this viaI of liquid
gains advantage on saving throws against poison for I
hour. lt confers no benetit to undead or constructs.
Arcane Focus. An arcane focus is a special iteman orb, a crystal, a rod, a specially constructed staff,
a wand.like length ofwood, or some similar itemdesigned to channel the power of arcane spells. A
sorcerer, warlock, or wizard can use such an item as a
spellcasting focus, as described in chapter 10.
Bal/ Bearings. As an action, you can spill these tiny
metal balls from their pouch to cover a levei area 10
feet square. A creature moving across the covered area
must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or fali
prone. A creature moving through the area at half speed
doesn't need to make the saving throw.
Block and Tackle. A set of pulleys with a cable
threaded through them and a hook to attach to objects, a
block and tackle allows you to hoist up to four times the
weight you can normally lift.
Book. A book might contain poetry, historical
accounts, information pertaining to a particular tield
of lore, diagrams and notes on gnomish contraptions,
or just about anything else that can be represented
using text or pictures. A book of spells is a spellbook
(described later in this section).
Caltrops. As an action, you can spread a single bag
of caltrops to cover a 5-foot-square area. Any creature
that enters the area must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity
saving throw or stop moving and take I piercing
damage. Unti! the creature regains at least I hit point,
its walking speed is reduced by 10 feet. A creature
moving through the area at half speed doesn't need to
make the saving throw.
Candle. For I hour, a candle sheds bright light in a
5.foot radius and dim light for an additional 5 feet.
Case, Crossbow Bolt. This wooden case can hold up
to twenty crossbow bolts.
Case, Map or Scrol/. This cylindricalleather case can
hold up to ten rolled-up sheets of paper or tive rolled-up
sheets of parchment.
Chain. A chain has 10 hit points. lt can be burst with a
successful DC 20 Strength check.
Climber's Kit. A climber's kit includes special pitons,
boot tips, gloves, and a harness. You can use the
climber's kit as an action to anchor yourself; when you
do, you can't fali more than 25 feet from the point where
you anchored yourself, and you can't climb more than 25
feet away from that point without undoing the anchor.
Component Pouch. A component pouch is a small,
watertight leather belt pouch that has compartments
to hold ali the material components and other special
items you need to cast your spells, except for those
components that have a specitic cost (as indicated in a
spell's description).
Crowbar. Using a crowbar granls advantage
to Strength checks where the crowbar's leverage
can be applied.

Druidic Focus. A druidic focus might be a sprig of
mistletoe or holly, a wand or scepter made of yew or
another special wood, a staff drawn whole out of a living
tree, or a totem object incorporating feathers, fur, bones,
and teeth from sacred animaIs. A druid can use such an
object as a spellcasting focus, as described in chapter 10.
Fishing Tackle. This kit includes a wooden rod, silken
line, corkwood bobbers, steel hooks, lead sinkers, velvet
lures, and narrow netting.
Healer's Kit. This kit is a leather pouch containing
bandages, salves, and splints. The kit has ten uses. As
an action, you can expend one use of the kit to stabilize
a creature that has O hit points, without needing to make
a Wisdom (Medicine) check.
Holy Symbol. A holy symbol is a representation of
a god or pantheon. lt might be an amulet depicting a
symbol representing a deity, the same symbol carefully
engraved or inlaid as an emblem on a shield, or a tiny
box holding a fragment of a sacred relic. Appendix B
lists the symbols commonly associated with many gods
in the multiverse. A cleric or paladin can use a holy
symbol as a spellcasting focus, as described in chapter
lO. To use the symbol in this way, the caster must hold it
in hand, wear it visibly, or bear it on a shield.
Holy Water. As an action, you can splash the contents
of this lIask onto a creature within 5 feet of you or throw
it up to 20 feet, shattering it on impact. In either case,
make a ranged attack against a target creature, treating
the holy water as an improvised weapon. If the target is
a tiend or undead, it takes 2d6 radiant damage.
4
EQUIPMENT

,
PACKS

lhe starting equipmenl you gel fram your elass ineludes a
colleclion of useful advenluring gear, pullogelher in a pack.
lhe conlenls oflhese packs are Iisled here. Ifyou are buying
your slarling equipmenl, you can purchase a pack for lhe
price shown, which mighl be cheaper lhan buying lhe ilems
individually.
Surglar's Pack (16 gp). Ineludes a backpack, a bag of 1,000
ball bearings, 10 feel of slring, a bell, 5 candles, a crowbar, a
hammer, 10 pilons, a hooded lanlern, 2 ftasks of oil, 5 days
ralions, a linderbox, and a walerskin. lhe pack also has 50
feel of hempen rope slrapped lo lhe side of it.
Diplomat's Pack (39 gp). Ineludes a chesl, 2 cases for maps
and scrolls, a seI offine elolhes, a bollle ofink, an ink pen,
a lamp, 2 flasks of oil, 5 sheels of paper, aviai of perfume,
sealing wax, and soap.
Dungeoneer's Pack (12 gp). Ineludes a backpack, a crowbar,
a hammer, 10 pilons, 10 lorches, a linderbox, 10 days
of ralions, and a walerskin. lhe pack also has 50 feel of
hempen rope slrapped lo lhe side of il.
Entertainer's Pack (40 gp). Ineludes a backpack, a bedrall,
2 coslumes, 5 candles, 5 days of ralions, a walerskin, and a
disguise kil.
Explorer's Pack (10 gp). Ineludes a backpack, a bedrall,
a mess kil, a linderbox, 10 lorches, 10 days of ralions, and
a walerskin. lhe pack also has 50 feel ofhempen rape
slrapped lo lhe side of il.
Priest's Pack (19 gp). Ineludes a backpack, a blankel, 10
candles, a linderbox, an alms box, 2 blocks ofincense, a
censer, veslmenls, 2 days of ralions, and a walerskin.
Scholar's Pack (40 gp). Includes a backpack, a book aflore,
a boltle ofink, an ink pen, 10 sheels ofparchmenl, a lillle
bag of sand, and a small knife.

~

~
PART I

EQUIP

fENT

A cleric ar paladin may create holy water by
performing a special ritual. The ritual takes 1 hour
to perform, uses 25 gp worth of powdered silver, and
requires the caster to expend a 1st-levei spell slot.
Hunting Trap. When you use your action to set it,
this trap forms a saw-toothed steel ring that snaps shut
when a creature steps on apressure plate in the center.
The trap is affixed bya heavy chain to an immobi!e
object, such as a tree ar a spike driven into the ground.
A creature that steps on the plate must succeed on a DC
13 Dexterity saving throw ar take Id4 piercing damage
and stop moving. Thereafter, unti! the creature breaks
free of the trap, its movement is limited by the length
of the chain (typically 3 feet long). A creature can use
its action to make a DC 13 5trength check, freeing
itself ar another creature within its reach on a success.
Each fai!ed check deals 1 piercing damage to the
trapped creature.
Lamp. A lamp casts bright light in a 15-foot radius
and dim light for an additional 30 feet. Once lit, il burns
for 6 hours on a flask (1 pint) of oil.
Lantern, Bul/seye. A bullseye lantern casts bright
light in a 60-foot cone and dim light for an additional 60
feet. Once lit, it burns for 6 hours on a flask (1 pint) of oil.
Lantern, Hooded. A hooded lantern casts bright light
in a 30-foot radius and dim light for an additional 30
feet. Once lit, it burns for 6 hours on a flask (1 pinl) of
oil. As an action, you can lower the hood, reducing the
light lo dim light in a 5-foot radius.
Lock. A key is provided with the lock. Without the
key, a creature proticient with thieves' toois can pick
this lock with a successful DC 15 Dexterity check.
Vour DM may decide that better locks are available
for higher prices.
PART 1 I EQUIPMENT

Magnifying Glass. This lens allows a closer look at
small objects. It is also useful as a substitute for flint
and steel when starting tires. Lighting a /ire with a
magnifying glass requires light as bright as sunlight to
focus, tinder to ignite, and about 5 minutes for the /ire
to ignite. A magnifying glass grants advantage on any
ability check made to appraise ar inspect an item that is
small ar highly detailed.
Manacles. These metal restraints can bind a 5mall
ar Medium creature. Escaping the manacles requires
a successful DC 20 Dexterity check. Breaking them
requires a successful DC 20 5trength check. Each
set of manacles comes with one key. Without the key,
a creature pro/icient with thieves' tools can pick the
manacles' lock with a successful DC 15 Dexterity
check. Manacles have 15 hit points.
Mess Kit. This tin box contains a cup and simple
cutlery. The box clamps together, and one side can
be used as a cooking pan and the other as a plate ar
shallow bowl.
Oi/. Oi! usually comes in a clay flask that holds 1
pinto As an action, you can splash the oi! in this flask
anta a creature within 5 feet of you ar throw it up to
20 feet, shattering it on impacto Make a ranged attack
against a target creature ar object, treating the oi! as
an improvised weapon. On a hit, the target is covered
in oil. If the larget takes any /ire damage before the oi!
dries (after 1 minute), the target takes an additional 5
/ire damagc from the burning oil. Vou can also pour a
flask of oi! on the ground to cover a 5-foot-square area,
provided that the surface is leveI. Ir lit. the oi! burns for
2 rounds and deals 5 tire damage to any creature that
enters the area ar ends its turn in the area, A creature
can take this damage only once per turno

Poison, Basic. Vou can use the poison in Ihis via I
lOcoat one slashing or piercing weapon or up to three
pieces of ammunition. Applying the poison takes
an action. A creature hit by the poisoned weapon or
ammunition must make a DC 10 Constitution saving
throw or take 1d4 poison damage. Once applied, the
poison retains potency for I minute before drying.
Potion ofHeaJinl1. A character who drinks the magical
red fiuid in this vial regains 2d4 + 2 hit points. Drinking
or administering a potion takes an action.
Pouch. A c10th or leather pouch can hold up to 20
sling bullets or 50 blowgun needles, among other
things. A compartmentalized pouch for holding spell
components is called a component pouch (described
earlier in this section).
Quiver. A quiver can hold up to 20 arrows.
Ram, Portable. Vou can use a portable ram to break
down doors. When doing so, you gain a +4 bonus on the
Strength check. One other character can help you use
the ram, giving you advantage on this check.
Rations. Rations consist of dry foods suitable
for extended travei, including jerky, dried fruit,
hardlack, and nuts.
Rope. Rope, whether made of hemp or silk, has 2 hit
points and can be burst with a DC 17 Strenglh check.
Sca/e, Merchant's. A scale includes a small balance,
pans, and a suitable assortment of weights up to 2
pounds. With it, you can measure the exact weight of
small objects, such as raw precious metais or trade
goods, to help determine their worth.
SpeJlbook. Essential for wizards, a spellbook is
a lealher.bound tome wilh 100 blank vellum pages
suitable for recording spells.

SpYI1/ass. Objeets viewed through a spyglass are
magnitied to twice their size.
Tent. A simple and portable canvas shelter, a
tent sleeps two.
Tinderbox. This small container holds fiint, tire steel,
and tinder (usually dry c10th soaked in Iight oil) used lo
kindle a tire. Using it to Iight a torch-or anything else
with abundant, exposed fuel-takes an action. Lighting
any olher tire takes 1 minute.
Torch. A torch burns for 1 hour, providing bright Iight
in a 20.foot radius and dim light for an additional 20
fee!. If you make a melee attack with a burning torch
and hit, it deals 1 tire damage.
CONTAINER

Capacily

Backpack*

1 cubic f001/30 pounds of gear
40 gallons liquid, 4 cubic feel solid

Barrei
Basket
Bottle
Bucket
Chest
Flask ar lankard
Jug ar pilcher
PaI, iran
Pouch
Sack
Via I
Walerskin
)'C

CAPACITY

Container

2 cubic feel/40 pounds of gear
1112 pinls liquid
3 gallons liquid, 1/2 cubic fool solid
12 cubic feel/300
1 pinlliquid
1 gallon liquid

pounds of gear

1 gallon liquid
1/5 cubic f001/6 pounds of gear
1 cubic f001/30 pounds of gear
4 ounces liquid
4 pinls liquid

You can al50 strap items, such as a bedroll ar a coil af rape,

to lhe oulside of a backpack.

PART

I

EQUII'MENT

153

TOOLS
A to01helps you to do something you couldn't otherwise
do, such as craft or repair an item, forge a document, or
pick a lock. Your race, c1ass, background, or feats give
you proficiency with certa in tools. Proficiency with a to01
allows you to add your proficiency bonus to any ability
check you make using that tool. Too! use is not tied to
a single ability, since proficiency with a tool represents
broader knowledge of its use. For example, the DM
might ask you to make a Dexterity check to carve a fine
detail with your woodcarver's tools, or a Strength check
to make something out of particularly hard wood.
TOOlS
Item

Cost

Weight

Alchemist's supplies
Brewer's supplies
Calligrapher's supplies
Carpenter's tools

50 gp
20 gp
10 gp
8 gp

81b.
91b.
51b.
61b.

Cartographer's tools
Cobbler's tools

15 gp.
5 gp

61b.
51b.

Cook's utensils
Glassblower's tools

1 gp
30 gp
25 gp

81b.
51b.
21b.

5 gp
10 gp
10 gp
10 gp

51b.
81b.
51b.

Arlisan's lools

Jeweler's tools
Leatherworker's tools
Mason's tools
Painter's supplies
Potter's tools
Smith's tools
Tinker's tools

20 gp
50 gp

Weaver's tools

1 gp
1 gp
25 gp
15 gp

Woodcarver's tools
Disguise kit
Forgery kit
Gaming seI
Dice set

1 sp

Dragonchess set

1 gp

Playing card set
Three-Dragon Ante set

5sp
1 gp

Herbalism kit
Musical instrument
Bagpipes
Drum
Dulcimer
Flute
Lute
Lyre
Horn
Pan Rute
Shawm
Viol
Navigator's tools
Poisoner's kit
Thieves' tools
Vehicles (Iand ar water)

PART I I EQUIPMENT

101b.
51b.
51b.
31b.
51b.

1/2Ib.

5 gp

31b.

30 gp
6 gp
25 gp

61b.

2 gp
35 gp

31b.
101b.
1 Ib.
21b.
21b.
21b.

30 gp
3 gp
12 gp
2 gp
30 gp
25 gp
50 gp
25 gp

21b.
llb.
llb.
21b.
21b.
1 Ib.

"

*

* See the "Mounts and Vehicles" section.

15+

31b.
81b.

Artisan's Too/s. These special tools inc1ude the items
needed to pursue a craft or trade. The table shows
examples of the most common types of tools, each
providing items related to a single craft. Proficiency
with a set of artisan's tools lets you add your proficiency
bonus to any ability checks you make using the tools
in your craft. Each type of artisan's tools requires a
separate proficiency.
Disl1uise Kit. This pouch of cosmetics, hair dye, and
small props lets you create disguises that change your
physical appearance. Proficiency with this kit lets you
add your proficiency bonus to any ability checks you
make to create a visual disguise.
Forl1ery Kit. This small box contains a variety of
papers and parchments, pens and inks, seals and
sealing wax, gold and silver leaf, and other supplies
necessary to create convincing forgeries of physica!
documents. Proficiency with this kit lets you add your
proficiency bonus to any ability checks you make to
create a physical forgery of a document.
Gaminl1 Set. This item encompasses a wide range
of game pieces, inc1uding dice and decks of cards (for
games such as Three-Dragon Ante). A few common
examples appear on the Tools table, but other kinds of
gaming sets exist. If you are proficient with a gaming
set, you can add your proficiency bonus to ability checks
you make to play a game with that set. Each type of
gaming set requires a separate proficiency.
HerbaJism Kit. This kit contains a variety of
instruments such as c1ippers, morta r and pestIe, and
pouches and vials used by herbalists to create remedies
and potions. Proficiency with this kit lets you add your
proficiency bonus to any ability checks you make to
identify or apply herbs. AIso, proficiency with this kit is
required to create antitoxin and polions or healinl1.
Musica/lnstrument.
Several of the most common
types of musical instruments are shown on the table as
examples. Ir you have proficiency with a given musical
instrument, you can add your proficiency bonus to
any ability checks you make to play music with the
instrumento A bard can use a musical instrument as a
spellcasting focus, as described in chapter 10. Each type
of musical instrument requires a separate proficiency.
Navil1ator's Too/s. This set of instruments is used
for navigation at sea. Proficiency with navigator's tools
lets you chart a ship's course and follow navigation
charts. In addition, these tools allow you to add your
proficiency bonus to any ability check you make to avoid
getting lost at sea.
Poisoner's Kit. A poisoner's kit inc1udes the vials,
chemicals, and other equipment necessary for the
creation of poisons. Proficiency with this kit lets you add
your proficiency bonus to any ability checks you make to
craft or use poisons.
Thieves' Too/s. This set of tools inc1udes a small file,
a set of lock picks, a small mirror mounted on a metal
handle, a set of narrow-bladed scissors, and a pair of
pliers. Proficiency with these tools lets you add your
proficiency bonus to any ability checks you make to
disarm traps or open locks.

MOUNTS

AND VEHICLES

A good mount can help you move more quickly through
the wilderness, but its primary purpose is to carry the
gear that would otherwise slow you down. The Mounts
and Other Animais table shows each animal's speed and
base carrying capacity.
An animal pulling a carriage, cart, chariot, sled,
or wagon can move weight up to tive times its base
carrying capacity, inc1uding the weight of the vehic1e.
If multiple animais pull the same vehic1e, they can add
their carrying capacity together.
Mounts other than those listed here are available in
the worlds of 0&0, but they are rare and not normally
available for purchase. These inc1ude flying mounts
(pegasi, griffons, hippogriffs, and similar animaIs) and
even aquatic mounts (giant sea horses, for example).
Acquiring such a mount often means securing an egg
and raising the creature yourself, making a bargain with
a powerful entity, or negotiating with the mount itself.
Barding. Barding is armor designed to protect an
animal's head, neck, chest, and body. Any type of
armor shown on the Armor table in this chapter can
be purchased as barding. The cost is four times the
equivalent armor made for humanoids, and it weighs
twice as much.
SaddJes. A military saddle braces the rider, helping
you keep your seat on an active mount in battle. 1t
gives you advantage on any check you make to remain
mounted. An exotic saddle is required for riding any
aquatic or flying mount.
VehicJe Proficiency. Ifyou have proticiency with a
certain kind of vehic1e (land or water), you can add your
proticiency bonus to any check you make to control that
kind of vehic1e in difficult circumstances.
Rowed Vesse1s. Keelboats and rowboats are used OH
lakes and rivers. If going downstream, add the speed of
the current (typically 3 miles per hour) to the speed of

55

lhe vehicle. These vehicles can'l be rowed againsl any
significanl currenl, bUllhey can be pulled upslream
by drafl animais on lhe shores. A rowboal weighs 100
pounds, in case advenlurers carry il over land.

TRADE

GOODS

CosI

Goods

1 cp

1 ib. of wheat
1 ib. of fiour or one chicken
1 ib. of sall

2 cp
MOUNTS

ANO

OTHER

ANIMALS

Ilem

CosI

Camel
Donkey or mule
Elephanl

50 gp
8 gp
200 gp
50 gp
75 gp

Horse, drafl
Horse, riding
Masliff
Pony

50 fI.
40 fI.
40 fI.
40 ft.
60 fI.
40 fI.

25 gp

40 ft.

30 gp
400 gp

Warhorse
TACK,

Speed

HARNESS,

ANO

60 fI.

DRAWN

Ilem

2 gp
3 gp

5401b.
4801b.
1951b.

5 gp
10 gp
15 gp
50 gp

1 Ib. of cinnamon or pepper, or one sheep
1 Ib. of c10ves or one pig
1 Ib. of silver or 1 sq. yd. oflinen
1 sq. yd. of silk or one eow
1 Ib. of saffron or one ox
1 Ib. of gold

500 gp

1 Ib. of plalinum

2251b.
5401b.

Weighl

x4

x2
llb.
6001b.

15 gp
250 gp

2001b.
1001b.

5 cp

101b.

Exolic
Mililary

60 gp
20 gp

401b.
301b.

Pack
Riding

5 gp
10 gp

151b.
251b.
81b.

Chariol
Feed (per day)

$addle

Saddiebags
Sled
Slabling (per day)
Wagon
WATERBORN

4 gp
20 gp
5sp
35 gp

4001b.

CosI

Speed

30,000 gp
3,000 gp
10,000 gp
50 gp
10,000 gp
25,000 gp

4 mph
1 mph

3001b.

E VEH ICLES

Ilem
Galley
Keelboal
Longship
Rowboal
Sailing ship
Warship

1 Ib. of copper or 1 sq. yd. of colton eloth
1 Ib. of ginger or one goat

4801b.
4201b.
1,320Ib.

2 gp
100 gp

Bil and bridle
Carriage
Carl

1 gp

1 Ib. ofiron or 1 sq. yd. of canvas

VEHICLES

CosI

Barding

Carrying
Capacily

5 cp
1 sp
5sp

3 mph
llf2 mph

2 mph

2'12 mph

TRADE GOODS
Mosl weallh is nol in coins. It is measured in liveslock,
grain, land, righlS lo collecllaxes, or righls lo resources
(such as a mine or a fores I).
Guilds, nobles, and royally regulale trade. Charlered
companies are granled righls to conducl trade along
certain routes, to send merchant ships to various ports,
or to buy or sell specific goods. Guilds set prices for
lhe goods or services lhat lhey conlrol, and determine
who may or may nol offer lhose goods and services.
Merchanls commonly exchange trade goods without
using currency. The Trade Goods table shows the value
of commonly exchanged goods.

EXPENSES
When not descending into lhe depths of the earth,
exploring ruins for lost treasures, or waging war againsl
the encroaching darkness, adventurers face more
mundane realities. Even in a fanlastical world, people
require basic necessilies such as shelter, sustenance,
and clothing. These things cost money, allhough some
lifestyles cosI more lhan others.

LIFESTYLE

EXPENSES

Lifeslyle expenses provide you with a simple way lo
accounl for the cost of living in a fantasy world. They
cover your accommodations, food and drink, and ali
your olher necessities. Furthermore, expenses cover the
cosi of maintaining your equipment so you can be ready
when advenlure nexl calls.
At lhe slart of each week or month (your choice),
choose a lifeslyle from the Expenses lable and pay the
price to sustain lhat lifeslyle. The prices lisled are per
day, so if you wish lo calculate the cosI of your chosen
lifestyle over a thirly-day period, multiply the listed price
by 30. Your lifestyle might change from one period lo
lhe next, based on lhe funds you have aI your disposal,
or you might maintain lhe same lifestyle throughout
your character's career.
Your Iifestyle choice can have consequences.
Mainlaining a weallhy lifestyle might help you make
contacts with the rich and powerful, though you run the
risk of altracting thieves. Likewise, living frugally might
help you avoid criminais, but you are unlikely lo make
powerful conneclions.
LIFESTYLE

Lifeslyle

EXPENSES

Price/Day

Wrelehed
Squalid
Poor
Modesl
Comforlable
Weallhy
Aristocratic

1 sp
2sp
1 gp
2 gp
4 gp
10 gp minimum

PART 1

EQUIP lENT

157

Wretehed. Vou live in inhumane conditions. With
no place to call home, you shelter wherever you can,
sneaking into barns, huddling in old crates, and relying
on the goad graces of people better off than you. A
wretched lifestyle presents abundant dangers. Violence,
disease, and hunger follow you wherever you go. Other
wretched people cavet your armor, weapons, and
adventuring gear, which represent a fortune by their
standards. Vou are beneath the notice of most people.
SquaJid. Vou live in a leaky stable, a mud-floored hut
just outside town, or a vermin-infested boarding house
in the worst part of town. Vou have shelter from the
elements, but you live in a desperate and often vialent
environment, in places rife with disease, hunger, and
misfortune. Vou are beneath the notice of most people,
and you have few legal protections. Most people at
this lifestyle levei have suffered some terrible setback.
They might be disturbed, marked as exiles, or suffer
from disease.
Poor. A poor lifestyle means going without the
comforts available in a stable community. Simple food
and lodgings, threadbare clothing, and unpredictable
conditions result in a sufficient, though probably
unpleasant, experience. Vour accommodations might
be a room in a flophouse or in the common room above
a tavern. Vou benefit from some legal protections,
but you still have to contend with violence, crime,
and disease. People at this lifestyle levei tend to be
unskilled laborers, costermongers, peddlers, thieves,
mercenaries, and other disreputable types.
Modest. A modest lifestyle keeps you out of the slums
and ensures that you can maintain your equipment.
Vou live in an 01der part of town, renting a room in a
boarding house, inn, or temple. Vou don't go hungry or
thirsty, and your living conditions are clean, if simple.
Ordinary people living modest lifestyles include soldiers
with families, laborers, students, priests, hedge wizards,
and the like.

ComfortabJe. Choosing a comfortable lifestyle
means that you can afford nicer clothing and can easily
maintain your equipment. Vou live in a small cottage
in a middle-class neighborhood or in a private room
at a fine inn. Vou associate with merchants, skilled
tradespeople, and military officers.
Wea1thy. Choosing a wealthy lifestyle means living a
life of !uxury, though you might not have achieved the
social status associated with the old money of nobility
or royalty. Vou live a lifestyle comparable to that of a
highly successful merchant, a favored servant of the
royalty, or the owner of a few small businesses. Vou
have respectable lodgings, usually a spacious home in
a good part of town or a comfortable suite at a fine inn.
Vou likely have a small staff of servants.
Aristoeratie. Vou live a life of plenty and comfort. Vou
move in circles populated by the most powerful people
in the community. Vou have excellent lodgings, perhaps
a townhouse in the nicest part of town or rooms in the
finest inn. Vou dine at the best restaurants, retain the
most skilled and fashionable tailor, and have servants
attending to your every need. Vou receive invitations
to the social gatherings of the rich and powerful, and
spend evenings in the company of politicians, guild
leaders, high priests, and nobility. Vou must also
contend with the highest leveIs of deceit and treachery.
The wealthier you are, the greater the chance you will
be drawn into political intrigue as a pawn or participant.

FOOD, DRINK,

AND LODGING

The Food, Drink, and Lodging table gives prices for
individual food items and a single night's lodging. These
prices are included in your totallifestyle expenses.

Fooo, DRINK,

ANO LOOGING

Item

Cost

Ale
Callon

2 sp

Mug

4 cp

Banquet (per person)
Bread, loaf
Cheese, hunk
Inn stay (per day)

10 gp
2 cp
1 sp
7 cp

Squalid
Poor
Modest
Comfortable
Wealthy

2 gp

Aristocratic

4 gp

1 sp
5 sp
8 sp

Meals (per day)
Squalid
Poor
Modest
Comfortable
Wealthy
Aristocratic
Meat, chunk

3 cp
6 cp
3 sp
5 sp
8 sp
2 gp

3 sp

Wine

Common (pitcher)
Fine (bottle)
PART 11 EQUIPMENT

2 sp

10 gp

••

••

SELF-SUFFICIENCY

lhe expenses and lifeslyles deseribed in lhis ehapler assume
lhal you are spending your lime between advenlures
in lown,
availing yourself of whalever serviees you ean afford-paying
for food and sheller, paying lownspeople
lo sharpen your
sword and repair your armor, and so on. Some eharaelers,
lhough, mighl prefer lo spend lheir lime away from
eivilizalion, suslaining lhemselves
in lhe wild by hunling,
foraging, and repairing lheir own gear.
Mainlaining lhis kind oflifeslyle doesn'l require you lO
spend any eoin, bul il is lime.eonsuming.
If you spend
your lime between advenlures
praelieing a profession, as
deseribed in ehapler 8, you ean eke oul the equivalent of a
poor Iifestyle. Profieieney in the Survival skilllets you live aI
the equivalent of a eomforlable
lifestyle .

••

••

SERVICES
Advenlurers can pay nonplayer characters to assist them
or act on their behalf in a variety of circumstances. Most
such hirelings have fairly ordinary skills, while others
are masters of a craft or art, and a few are experts with
specialized adventuring skills.
Some of the most basic types of hirelings appear on
the Services table. Other common hirelings include
any of the wide variety of people who inhabit a typical
town or city, when the adventurers pay them to
perform a specific task. For example, a wizard might
paya carpenter to conslruct an elaborale chest (and
ils miniature replica) for use in the Leomund's secret
chest spell. A fighter might commission a blacksmilh to
forge a special sword. A bard mighl pay a tailor lo make
exquisite clothing for an upcoming performance in
front of the duke.
Olher hirelings provide more expert or dangerous
services. Mercenary soldiers paid to help the
advenlurers take on a hobgoblin army are hirelings, as
are sages hired to research ancient or esoleric lore. If a
high-Ievel adventurer establishes a stronghold of some
kind, he or she might hire a whole staff of servants and
agents to run the place, from a castellan or steward
to meniallaborers lo keep the stables clean. These
hirelings often enjoy a long-term contract that includes
a place to live within lhe stronghold as part of the
offered compensation.
SERVICES
Service

Pay

Coach cah
Belween

lowns

Wilhin a eily

3 cp per mile

1 cp

Hireling
Skilled

2 gp per day

Untrained

2 sp per day

Messenger

2 cp per mile

Road or gate 1011

1 cp

Ship's

1 sp per mile

passage

Skilled hirelings include anyone hired lo perform a
service that involves a proficiency (including weapon,
tool, or skill): a mercenary, artisan, scribe, and so on.
The pay shown is a minimum; some expert hirelings
require more pay. Untrained hirelings are hired for
menial work that requires no particular skill and can
include laborers, porters, maids, and similar workers.

SPELLCASTING

SERVICES

People who are able to cast spells don't fali into the
category of ordinary hirelings. lt might be possible to
find someone willing to cast a spell in exchange for coin
or favors, but it is rarely easy and no established pay
rates exisl. As a rule, the higher the leveI of the desired
spell, the harder it is to find someone who can cast il
and the more it costs.
Hiring someone to cast a relatively common spell
of 1st or 2nd levei, such as cure wounds or identify, is
easy enough in a city or town, and might cost 10 to 50
gold pieces (plus the cost of any expensive material
components). Finding someone able and wiHing to
cast a higher-Ievel spell might involve traveling to a
large city, perhaps one with a university or prominent
temple. Once found, lhe spellcaster might ask for a
service instead of payment-the kind of service that
only adventurers can provide, such as retrieving arare
item from a dangerous locale or traversing a monsterinfested wilderness to deliver somelhing important to
a distant settlemenl.

TRINKETS
When you make your character, you can roll once on
lhe Trinkets table to gain a trinket, a simple item lightly
touched by mystery. The DM might also use this table.
It can help stock a room in a dungeon or fiHa creature's
pockets.

PART I

EQUIPMENT

59

TRINKETS

d100

d100

Trinkel

01
02
03
04

A mummified goblin hand
A piece of crystal that faintly glows in the moonlight
A gold coin minted in an unknown land
A diary written in a language you don't know

05

A brass ring that never tarnishes

06
07

An old chess piece made from glass
A pair ofknucklebone
dice, each with a skull symbol

08

on the si de thal would normally show six pips
A small idol depicting a nightmarish creature that

09

gives you unsettling dreams when you sleep near it
A rope necklace from which dangles four mummified

10

elf fingers
The deed for a parcel ofland

11
12
13
14

to you
A l-ounce

block made from an unknown

material

A small c10th doll skewered with needles
A tooth from an unknown beast
An enormous scale, perhaps from a dragon

15
16

A bright green feather
An old divination card bearing your likeness

17

A glass orb filled with moving smoke
A 1-pound egg wilh a bright red shell

18
19
20

A pipe that blows bubbles
A glass jar containing a weird bit of fiesh fioating in

21

pickling fiuid
A tiny gnome-crafted

22
23
24
25
26

music box that plays a song

A shard of obsidian that always feels warm to the

28

touch
A dragon's

29
30
31
32

35

on one end that throws sparks when wet
A white, sequined glove sized for a human

36
37

A vest with one hundred liny pockets

38
39

A small, weightless stone block
A tiny sketch portrait of a goblin
An empty glass vial that smells of perfume

40

opened
A gemstone

41
42

examined by anyone but you
A scrap of c10th from an old banner
A rank insignia from a lost legionnaire

43
44
45

A tiny silver bell without a c1apper
A mechanical canary inside a gnomish lamp
A tiny chest carved to look like it has numerous

46

on the bottom
A dead sprite inside a clear glass bottle
A metal can that has no opening but sounds

48

PART I I EQUIPMENT

graphite, or any olher substance or marking
A silver badge in the shape of a five-pointed star
A knife lhat belonged to a relative
A glass via I filled with nail c1ippings
A rectangular metal device with two tiny metal cups

A multicolored stone disk
A tiny silver icon of a raven
A bag containing forty-seven

teeth, one

A pair of old socks
A blank book whose pages refuse to hold ink, chalk,

33
34

47

humanoid

bony talon hanging from a plain leather

necklace

you dimly remember from your childhood
A small wooden statuette of a smug halfiing
A brass orb etched with strange runes

of which is rotten

160

in a realm unknown

Trinkel

27

when

that looks like a lump of coai when

feet

as if it

is filled with liquid, sand, spiders, or broken glass

49
50

(your choice)
A glass orb filled with water, in which swims a
c1ockwork goldfish
A silver spoon with an M engraved on the handle
A whistle made from gold-colored wood

dlOO

Trinkel

dlOO

Trinkel

51

A dead scarab beelle lhe size of your hand

79

An invilalion lO a parly where a murder happened

52
53

Two loy soldiers, one wilh a missing head
A small box filled wilh differenl.sized bultons

80

A bronze penlaele wilh an elching of a ral's head

54
55

A candle lhal can'l be lil

81

A liny cage wilh no door

A purple handkerchief
a powerful archmage

56
57

An old key
An indecipherable

58
59

A hill from a broken sword
A rabbil's fool

60
61

A glass eye

in its center

82
lreasure

map

62

A cameo carved in the likeness of a hideous
A silver skulllhe size of a coin

63

An alabaster

embroidered

with lhe name of

Half of a floorplan for a lemple, caslle, or some olher
structure

person

83

A bil of folded clolh lhal, when unfolded,
a slylish cap

84

A receipl of deposil aI a bank in a far.flung cily

85

A diary wilh seven missing pages
An empty silver snuffbox bearing an inscription

86

mask

lurns inlo

64

A pyramid of Slicky black incense thal smells very bad

87

An iron holy symbol devoled lo an unknown god

65

A nighlcap lhal, when worn, gives you pleasanl
dreams

88

A book lhallells lhe slory of a legendary
and fali, wilh lhe lasl chapler missing

66
67
68
69
70
71

on

lhe surface lhal says "dreams"
hero's rise

A single callrop made from bone

89

Aviai of dragon blood

A gold monoele frame wilhoullhe lens
A 1.inch cube, each si de painled a differenl color
A cryslal knob from a door

90
91
92

An ancienl arrow of elven design
A needle lhal never bends

A small packel filled wilh pink dusl

93

An emply wine bollle bearing a prelty labellhal

A fragmenl of a beauliful song, wrilten as musical
noles on lwo pieces of parchmenl

An ornale brooch of dwarven design
"The Wizard ofWines
331422.W"

72

A silver leardrop

earring made from a realleardrop

94

73

The shell of an egg painted wilh scenes of human
misery in dislurbing delail

95
96

74

A fan lhal, when unfolded,

75

A seI of bone pipes

97

A liny mechanical

76

A four.leaf elover pressed inside a book discussing
manners and eliquelle

98

A glass jar conlaining

shows a sleeping cal

says,

Winery, Red Dragon Crush,

A mosaic lile wilh a mullicolored,
A pelrified mouse
A black pirale flag adorned

glazed surface

wilh a dragon's

skull

and crossbones
crab or spider lhal moves aboul

when it's not being observed
lard wilh a labellhal

reads,

77

A sheel of parchmenl

mechanical conlraplion
An ornale scabbard lhal fils no blade you have

99

A wooden box wilh a ceramic boltom lhal holds a

78

found so far

100

A melai um conlaining

upon which is drawn a complex

"Griffon Grease"
living worm wilh a head on each end of ils body
lhe ashes of a hero

PART 1

EQUIPME

T

161

CHAPTER

6: CUSTOMIZATION

HE COMBINATION

Of ABILITY

SCORES, RACE,

class, and background defines your
character's capabilities in the game, and
the personal details you create set your
character apart from every other character.
Even within your class and race, you have
options to fine-tune what your character
can do. But this chapter is for players who-with the
DM's permission-want
to go a step further.
This chapter defines two optional sets of rules for
customizing your character: multiclassing and feats.
Multiclassing lets you combine classes together,
and feats are special options you can choose instead
of increasing your ability scores as you gain leveis.
Your DM decides whether these options are available
in a campaign.

MULTICLASSING
Multiclassing allows you to gain leveis in multi pie
classes. Doing so lets you mix the abilities of those
classes to realize a character concept that might not be
reAected in one of the standard class options.
With this role, you have the option of gaining a levei
in a new class whenever you advance in levei, instead
of gaining a leveI in your current class. Your leveis in
ali your classes are added together to determine your
character leveI. For example, if you have three leveIs in
wizard and two in fighter, you're a 5th-levei character.
As you advance in leveis, you might primarily remain
a member of your original class with just a few leveis
in another class, or you might change course entire!y,
never looking back at the c1ass you left behind. Vou
might even start progressing in a third or fourth c1ass.
Compared to a single-c1ass character of the same levei,
you'lI sacrifice some focus in exchange for versatility.
4
MULTICLASStNG

•

PREREQ_U_IS_I_T_E_S

_

To qualify for a new c1ass, you must meet the ability score
prerequisites for both your current c1ass and your new
one, as shown in the Multiclassing Prerequisites tabJe.
For example, a barbarian who decides to multiclass into
the druid c1ass must have both Strength and Wisdom
scores of 13 or higher. Without the full training that
a beginning character receives, you must be a quick
study in your new c1ass, having a natural aptitude that
is reAected by higher-than-average ability scores.
MULTlCLASSING

PREREQUISITES

Class

Ability Score Minimum

Barbarian
Bard

Strength 13
(harisma 13

Cleric

Wisdom 13

Druid
Fighter

Wisdom 13

Monk
Paladin
Ranger

Dexterity 13 and Wisdom 13
Strength 13 and (harisma 13
Dexterity 13 and Wisdom 13

Rogue
Sorcerer

Dexterity 13
(harisma 13

Strength

13 ar Dexterity 13

Warlock

(harisma

Wizard

Intelligence

EXPERIENCE

POINTS

13
13

The experience point cost to gain a levei is always
based on your total character leve!. as shown in the
Character Advancement table in chapter 1, not your levei
in a particular c1ass. So, if you are a c1eric 6jfighter 1,
you must gain enough XP to reach 8th levei before you
can take your second levei as a fighter or your seventh
levei as a c1eric.

EXAMPLE

Gary is playing a 4th-levei fighter. When his character earns
enough experience points to reach Sth levei, Gary decides
that his character will multielass instead of continuing to
progress as a fighter. Gary's fighter has been spending a lot
of time with Dave's rogue, and has even been doing some
jobs on the side for the local thieves' guild as a bruiser. Gary
decides that his character will multielass into the rogue e1ass,
and thus his character becomes a 4th.level fighter and lstlevei rogue (written as fighter 4/rogue 1).
When Gary's character earns enough experience to
reach 6th levei, he can decide whether to add another
fighter levei (becoming a fighter S/rogue 1), another rogue
levei (becoming a fighter 4/rogue 2), ar a levei in a third
e1ass, perhaps dabbling in wizardry thanks to the tome of
mysterious lore he acquired (becoming a fighter 4/rogue 1/
wizard 1).

••

OPTIONS

••

HIT

POINTS

AND HIT

DICE

Vou gain the hit points from your new c1ass as described
for leveis after 1st. You gain the 1st-leveI hit points for a
c1ass only when you are a 1st-levei character.
Vou add together the Hit Dice granted by ali your
classes to form your pool of Hit Dice. If the Hit Dice are
the same die type, you can simply pool them together.
For example, both the fighter and the paladin have a
dlO. so ifyou are a palndin 5/fighter 5, you have ten dlO
Hit Dice. Ifyour classes give you Hit Dice of different
types, keep track of them separate!y. If you are a paladin
5jcleric 5, for example, you have five dlO Hit Dice and
five d8 Hit Dice.

PROFICIENCY

BONUS

Vour proficiency bonus is always based on your total
character levei, as shown in the Character Advancement
table in chapter 1, not your levei in a particular class.
For example, ifyou are a fighter 3/rogue 2, YOllhave the
proficiency bonlls of a 5th-levei character, which is +3.

PART 1 I CUSTo~nZATION OPTIONS

UNARMORED

PROFICIENCIES
When you gain a levei in a class other than your first,
you gain only some of that class's starting proficiencies,
as shown in the Multiclassing Proficiencies table.
MUlTICLASSING

PROFICIENCIES

Class

Proficiencies

Barbarian

Shields, simple weapons,

Gained

Bard

Light armar, one skill ofyour ehoiee, one

martial weapons

musical instrument af your choice

Clerie
Druid

Light armar, medium

armar, shields

Light armar, medium

armar, shields

(druids

will not wear armar ar use shields made of
Fighter

metal)
Light armar, medium

armar, shields,

simple

weapons, martial weapons

Monk
Paladin

Simple weapons, shortswords
Light armar, medium armar, shields,

sim pie

Ranger

weapons, martial weapons
Light armar, medium armar, shields,

simple

weapons,
Rogue

martial weapons,

one skill from the

elass's skill list
Light armar, one skill from the c1ass's skill list,
thieves'

tools

Sorcerer

Warloek

Light armar, simple weapons

Wizard

CLASS FEATURES
When you gain a new leveI in a class, you get its features
for that leveI. A few features, however, have additional
rules when you're multiclassing: Channel Divinity, Extra
Attack, Unarmored Defense, and Spellcasting.
CHANNEL

DIVINITY

Ifyou already have the Channel Divinity feature and gain
a leveI in a class that also grants the feature, you gain the
Channel Divinity effects granted by that class, but getting
the feature again doesn't give you an additional use of
it. You gain additional uses only when you reach a class
levei that explicitly grants them to you. For example, if
you are a cleric 6/paladin 4, you can use Channel Divinity
twice between rests beca use you are high enough levei
in the cleric class to have more uses. Whenever you use
the feature, you can choose any of the Channel Divinity
effects available to you from your two classes.
EXTRA ATTACK

If you gain the Extra Attack class feature from more
than one class, the features don't add together. Vou
can't make more than two attacks with this feature
unless il says you do (as lhe fighter's version of Extra
Attack does). Similarly, the warlock's eldritch invocation
Thirsting Blade doesn't give you additional attacks if you
also have Extra Attack.

PART I I CUSTOMIZATlON

OPTIONS

DEFENSE

]f you already have the Unarmored Defense feature, you
can't gain it again from another class.
SPELLCASTING

Your capacity for spellcasting depends partly on your
combined leveis in ali your spellcasting classes and
partly on your individual leveis in those classes. Once
you have the Spellcasting feature from more than one
class, use the rules below. If you multiclass but have the
Spellcasting feature from only one class, you follow the
rules as described in that class.
SpeJls Known and Prepared. Vou determine
what spells you know and can prepare for each class
individually, as if you were a single.classed member of
that class. ]f you are a ranger 4/wizard 3, for example,
you know three Ist.level ranger spells based on your
leveis in the ranger class. As 3rd-Ievel wizard, you know
three wizard cantrips, and your spellbook contains ten
wizard spells, two of which (the two you gained when
you reached 3rd levei as a wizard) can be 2nd-levei
spells. Ifyour Intelligence is 16, you can prepare six
wizard spells from your spellbook.
Each spell you know and prepare is associated with one
of your classes, and you use the spellcasting ability of that
class when you cast the spell. Similarly, a spellcasting
focus, such as a holy symbol, can be used only for the
spells from the class associated with that focus.
SpeJl Slots. Vou determine your available spell slots
by adding together ali your leveIs in the bard, cleric,
druid, sorcerer, and wizard classes, half your leveis
(raunded down) in the paladin and ranger classes, and
a third of your fighter or rogue leveis (rounded down)
if you have the Eldritch Knight or the Arcane Trickster
feature. Use this total to determine your spell slots by
consulting the Multiclass Spellcaster table.
Ifyou have more than one spellcasting class, this table
might give you spell slots of a levei that is higher than
the spells you know or can prepare. Vou can use those
slots, but only to cast your lower.level spells. If a lowerlevei spell that you cast, like burning bands, has an
enhanced effect when cast using a higher.level slot, you
can use the enhanced effect, even though you don't have
any spells of that higher leveI.
For example, if you are the aforementioned ranger 4/
wizard 3, you count as a 5th-levei character when
determining your spell slots: you have four Ist.level
slots, three 2nd.level slots, and two 3rd.level slots.
However, you don't know any 3rd.level spells, nor do you
know any 2nd-levei ranger spells. Vou can use the spell
slots of those leveis to cast the spells you do know-and
potentially enhance their effects.
Pact Magie. If you have both the Spellcasting class
feature and the Pact Magic class feature from the warlock
class, you can use the spell slots you gain from the Pact
Magic feature to cast spells you know or have prepareu
from classes with the Spellcasting class feature, and you
can use the spell slots you gain fram the Spellcasting
class feature to cast warlock spells you know.

MULTICLASS

SPELLCASTER:

SPELL

SLOTS

PER SPELL

LEVEL

LvI.

1st

3rd

5th

1st

2

2nd

4th

6th

7th

8th

9th

Climbing doesn't halve your speed.
Vou can make a running long jump or a running high
jump after moving only 5 feet on foot, rather than
10 feet.
ACTOR

2nd

3

3rd

4

2

4th

4

3

Skilled at mimicry and dramatics, you gain the
following benefits:

5th

4

3

2

6th

4

3

1

7th

4

3

3
3

8th

4

3

3

2

9th

4

3

3

1

10th

4

3

2

11th

4

3
3

3
3
3

3

2

1

12th

4

3

1

4

3

14th

4

15th

4

3
3

3
3

3
3
3

2

13th

3
3

3

16th

4

3

3

3

17th

4

3
3

3

2

2

1

1

2

1

1

2

1

1

2

1

1

1

1

18th

4

3
3

3

3

1

1

19th

4

3

3

3

3

2

1

20th

4

3

3

3

3

2

2

FEATS
A feat represents a talent or an area of expertise that gives
a character special capabilities. lt embodies training,
experience, and abitities beyond what a c1ass provides.
At certain leveIs, your c1ass gives you the Ability Score
Improvement feature. Using the optional feats rule, you
can forgo taking that feature to take a feat of your choice
instead. Vou can take each feat only once, unless the
feat's description says otherwise.
Vou must meet any prerequisite specified in a feat
to take that feat. If you ever lose a feat's prerequisite,
you can't use lhat feat until you regain the prerequisite.
For example, the Grappler feat requires you to have a
Strength of 13 or higher. If your Strength is reduced
below 13 somehow-perhaps
by a withering curseyou can't benefit from the Grappler feat until your
Strength is restored.

Increase your Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20.
Vou have advantage on Charisma (Deception) and
Charisma (Performance) checks when trying to pass
yourself off as a different person.
Vou can mimic the speech of another person or the
sounds made by other creatures. Vou must have
heard the person speaking. or heard the creature
make the sound, for at least 1 minute. A successful
Wisdom (Insight) check contested by your Charisma
(Deception) check allows a tistener to determine that
the effect is faked.
CHARGER
When you use your action to Dash, you can use a
bonus action to make one melee weapon attack or to
shove a creature.
1fyou move at least 10 feet in a straight tine
immediately before taking this bonus action, you either
gain a +5 bonus to the attack's damage roll (if you chose
to make a melee attack and hit) or push the target up
to 10 feet away from you (if you chose to shove and
you succeed).
CROSSBOW

EXPERT

Thanks to extensive practice with the crossbow, you
gain the following benefits:
Vou ignore the loading quality of crossbows with
which you are proficient.
Being within 5 feet of a hostile creature doesn't
impose disadvantage on your ranged attack rolls.
When you use the Attack action and attack with a onehanded weapon, you can use a bonus action to attack
with a loaded hand crossbow you are holding.
DEFENSIVE

DUELIST

Prerequisite: Dexterity 13 or higher
ALERT
Always on the lookout for danger, you gain the
following benefits:
Vou gain a +5 bonus to initiative.
Vou can't be surprised while you are conscious.
Other creatures don't gain advantage on attack rolls
against you as a result of being hidden from you.
ATHLETE
Vou have undergone extensive physical training to gain
the following benefits:
Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a
maximum of 20.
When you are prone, standing up uses only 5 feet of
you r movement.

When you are wielding a finesse weapon with which
you are proficient and another creature hits you with
a melee attack, you can use your reaction to add your
proficiency bonus to your AC for that attack, potentially
causing the attack to miss you.
DUAL

WIELDER

Vou master fighting with two weapons, gaining the
following benefits:
Vou gain a +1 bonus to AC while you are wielding a
separate melee weapon in each hand.
Vou can use two-weapon fighting even whcn the onehanded melee weapons you are wielding aren't light.
Vou can draw or stow two one-handed weapons when
you would normally be able to draw or stow only one.
PART I I CUSTOMIZATIO.

OPTIO

S

DUNGEON

DELVER

Alert to the hidden traps and secret doors found in many
dungeons, you gain the following benefits:
Vou have advantage on Wisdom (Perception) and
Intelligence (Investigation) checks made to detect the
presence of secret doors,
Vou have advantage on saving throws made to avoid
or resist traps.
Vou have resistance to the damage dealt by traps.
Vou can search for traps while traveling at a normal
pace, instead of only at a slow pace.

DURABLE
Hardy and resilient, you gain the following benefits:
lncrease your Constitution score by I, to a
maximum of 20.

,66

PART I I CUSTOMIZATION

OPTIONS

When you roll a Hit Die to regain hit points, the
minimum number of hit points you regain from
the roll equals twice your Constitution modifier
(minimum of 2).

ELEMENTAL ADEPT
Prerequisite: The ability to cast at least one spell
When you gain this feat, choose one of the following
damage types: acid, cold, fire, lightning, or thunder.
Spells you cast ignore resistance to damage of the
chosen type. In addition, when you roll damage for a
spell you cast that deals damage of that type, you can
treat any I on a damage die as a 2.
Vou can select this feat multi pIe times. Each time
you do so, you must choose a different damage type.

GRAPPLER

INSPIRING

Prerequisite: Strength 13 ar higher

Prerequisite: Charisma 13 or higher

You've developed the skills necessary to hold your
own in close-quarters grappling. Vou gain the
following benefits:
Vou have advantage on attack rolls against a creature
you are grappling.
Vou can use your action to try to pin a creature grappled by you. To do so, make another grapple check. lf
you succeed, you and the creature are both restrained
until the grapple ends.
Creatures that are one size larger than you don't automatically succeed on checks to escape your grapple.

Vou can spend 10 minutes inspiring your companions,
shoring up their resolve to fight. When you do so, choose
up to six friendly creatures (which can include yourself)
within 30 feet of you who can see or hear you and who
can understand you. Each creature can gain temporary
hit points equal to your levei + your Charisma modifier.
A creature can't gain temporary hit points from this feat
again until it has finished a short or long rest.

GREAT WEAPON MASTER
You've learned to put the weight of a weapon to your
advantage, letting its momentum empower your strikes.
Vou gain the following benefits:
On your turn, when you score a criticai hit with a
mele e weapon or reduce a creature to O hit points
with one, you can make one melee weapon attack as a
bonus action.
Before you make a melee attack with a heavy weapon
that you are proficient with, you can choose to take a
-5 penalty to the attack roll. If the attack hits, you add
+10 to the attack's damage.

HEALER
Vou are an able physician, allowing you to mend wounds
quickly and get your allies back in the fight. Vou gain the
following benefits:
When you use a healer's kit to stabilize a dying creature, that creature also regains 1 hit point.
As an action. you can spend one use of a healer's kit to
tend to a creature and restore 1d6 + 4 hit points to it,
plus additional hit points equal to the creature's Illaxilllurn nurnber of Hit Dice. The creature can't regain
hit points frolll this feat again until it finishes a short
ar long rest.

HEAVILY ARMORED
Prerequisite: Proliciency with mediuJ1Jarmor
Vou have trained to Illaster the use of heavy armor,
gaining the following benefits:
Increase your Strength score by 1, to a rnaximum of 20.
• You gain proficiency with heavy armor.

HEAVY ARMOR MASTER
Prerequisite: Proliciency with heavy armor
Vou can use your armor to deflect strikes that would kill
others. Vou gain the following benefits:
Increase your Strength score by 1, to a Illaximum of 20.
While you are wearing heavy armor, bludgeoning.
piercing, and slashing damage that you take from nonmagical weapons is reduced by 3.

LEADER

KEEN MIND
Vou have a mind that can track time, direction,
and detail with uncanny precision. Vou gain the
following benefits.
1ncrease your lntelligence score by 1, to a rnaximum
of20.
Vou always know which way is north.
Vou always know the number of hours lef! before the
next sunrise ar sunset.

Vou can accurately recall anything you have seen or
heard within the past month.

LIGHTLY ARMORED
Vou have trained to master the use of light armor,
gaining the following benefits:
Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a
maximum of 20.
Vou gain proficiency with light armor.

LINGUIST
Vou have studied languages and codes, gaining the
following benefits:
Increase your Intelligence score by 1, to a maximum of 20.
Vou learn three languages of your choice.
Vou can ably create written ciphers. Others can't decipher acode you create unless you teach them, they
succeed on an Intelligence check (DC equal to your
1ntelligence score + your proficiency bonus), OI' they
use magic to decipher it.

LUCKY
Vou have inexplicable luck that seems to kick in at just
the right moment.
Vou have 3 luck points. Whenever you rnake an attack
roll, an ability check. ar a saving throw, you can spend
one luck point to roll an additional d20. Vou can choose
to spend one of your luck points after you roll the die,
but before the outcome is determined. Vou choose which
of the d20s is used for the attack roll, ability check, or
saving throw.
Vou can also spend one luck point when an attack
roll is made against you. RolI a d20, and then choose
whether the attack uses the attacker's rull or yours.
If more than one creature spends a luck point to
influence the outcome of a roll, lhe points cancel each
other oul; no additional dice are rolled.
Vou regain your expended luck points when you
finish a long rest.
PART 1 I CUSTOM IZA I ION OP1IONS

MAGE SLAYER
Vou have practiced techniques useful in melee combat
against spellcasters, gaining the following benefits:
When a creature within 5 feet of you casts a spell, you
can use your reaction to make a melee weapon attack
against that creature.
When you damage a creature that is concentrating on
a spell, that creature has disadvantage on the saving
throw it makes to maintain its concentration.
Vou have advantage on saving throws against spells
cast by creatures within 5 feet of you.

MAGIC INITIATE
Choose a c1ass: bard, c1eric, druid, sorcerer, warlock, or
wizard. Vou learn two cantrips of your choice from that
c1ass's spelllisl.
In addition, choose one 1st-levei spell from that same
lisl. Vou learn that spell and can cast it at its lowest
leveI. Once you cast it, you must finish a long rest before
you can cast it again.
Your spellcasting ability for these spells depends
on the c1ass you chose: Charisma for bard,
sorcerer, or warlock: Wisdom for c1eric or druid: or
Intelligence for wizard.

MARTIAL ADEPT
Vou have martial training that allows you to
perform special combat maneuvers. Vou gain the
following benefits:
Vou learn two maneuvers of your choice from among
those available to the Battle Master archetype in the
fighter c1ass. Ir a maneuver you use requires your target to make a saving throw to resist the maneuver's
effects, the saving throw DC equals 8 + your proficiency bonus + your Strength or Dexterity modifier
(your choice).
lfyou already have superiority dice, you gain one
more: otherwise, you have one superiority die, which
is a d6. This die is used to fuel your maneuvers. A
superiority die is expended when you use il. Vou
regain your expended superiority dice when you
finish a short or long resl.

MEDIUM ARMOR MASTER
Prerequisite: Proficiency with medium armor
Vou have practiced moving in medium armor to gain the
following benefits:
Wearing medium armor doesn't impose disadvantage
on your Dexterity (Stealth) checks.
When you wear medium armor, you can add 3,
rather than 2, to your AC if you have a Dexterity of
16 or higher.

MOBILE
Vou are exceptionally speedy and agile. Vou gain the
following benefits:
• Your speed increases by 10 feel.

[68

I'ART 1 I CUSTOM[ZAT10N OI'T[ONS

When you use the Dash action, difficult terrain doesn't
cost you extra movement on that turno
When you make a melee attack against a creature, you
don't provoke opportunity attacks from that creature
for the rest of the turn, whether you hit or nol.

MODERATELY ARMORED
Prerequisite: Proficiency with Jight armor
Vou have trained to master the use of medium armor
and shields, gaining the following benefits:
Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a
maximum of 20.
Vou gain proficiency with medium armor and shields.

MOUNTED

COMBATANT

Vou are a dangerous foe to face while mounted. While
you are mounted and aren't incapacitated, you gain the
following benefits:
Vou have advantage on melee attack rolls against any
unmounted creature that is smaller than your mounl.
Vou can force an attack targeted at your mount to target you instead.
Ir your mount is subjected to an effect that allows it to
make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, it instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the
saving throw, and only half damage if it fails.

OBSERVANT
Quick to notice details of your environment, you gain
the following benefits:
Increase your Intelligence or Wisdom score by 1, to a
maximum of 20.
Ir you can see a creature's mouth while it is speaking
a Ianguage you understand, you can interpret what it's
saying by reading its lips.
Vou have a +5 bonus to your passive Wisdom
(Perception) and passive Intelligence (Investigation)
scores.

POLEARM MASTER
Vou can keep your enemies at bay with reach weapons.
Vou gain the following benetits:
When you take the Attack action and attack with only
a glaive, halberd, or quarterstaff, you can use a bonus
action to make a melee attack with the opposite end of
the weapon. The weapon's damage die for this attack
is a d4, and the attack deals bludgeoning damage.
While you are wielding a glaive, halberd, pike, or quarterstaff, other creatures provoke an opportunity attack
from you when they enter your reach.

RESILIENT
Choose one ability score. Vou gain the following benefits:
Increase the chosen ability score by 1, to a maximum
of20.
Vou gain proficiency in saving throws using the
chosen ability.

RITUAL CASTER
Prerequisite: Intelligence or Wisdom 13 or higher
Vou have learned a number of spells that you can cast as
rituais. These spells are written in a ritual book, which
you must have in hand while casting one of them.
When you choose this feat, you aequire a ritual book
holding two 1st-levei spells of your ehoiee. Choose one
of the following classes: bard, c1erie, druid, soreerer,
warlock, or wizard. Vou must choose your spells
from that c1ass's spelllist, and the spells you choose
must have the ritual tag. The c1ass you ehoose also
determines your spelleasting ability for these spells:
Charisma for bard, sorcerer, or warloek; Wisdom for
c1eric or druid; or Intelligenee for wizard.
\f you come aeross a spell in written form, sueh as a
magical speJl seroJl or a wizard's spellbook, you might
be able to add lt to your ritual book. The spell must be
on the spelllist for the c1ass you chose, the spell's leveI
ean be no higher than half your levei (rounded up), and

it must have the ritual tag. The proeess of copying the
spell into your ritual book takes 2 hours per levei of the
spell, and eosts 50 gp per leveI. The cost represents
material components you expend as you cxperiment
with the spell to master it, as well as the fine inks you
need to record it.

SAVAGE ATTACKER
anee per turn when you roll damage for a melee weapon
attaek, you ean reroll the weapon's damage diee and use
either total.

SENTINEL
Vou have mastered teehniques to take advantage
of every drop in any enemy's guard, gaining the
following benefits:
Whcn you hit a ereature with an opportunity attack,
the creature's speed beeornes O for the rest of
the turn.

PART I

CUSTOMIZ n 10 : OP'flO.

t

Ih

Crealures wilhin 5 feel of you provoke opporlunity
atlacks from you even if they lake lhe Disengage
action bdore leaving your reach.
When a crealure within 5 feet of you makes an attack
againsl a larget olheI' lhan you (and lhal largel doesn'l
have lhis feal), you can use your reaction lo make a
melee weapon attack against lhe attacking crealure.

SHARPSHOOTER
Vou have maslered ranged weapons and can lllake
shols thal olhers lind impossible. Vou gain the
following benelits:
Attacking ai long range doesn'l impose disadvanlage
on your ranged weapon attack rolls.
Vour ranged weapon attacks ignore half cover and
lhree-quarlers cover.
Sdore you make an altack wilh a ranged weapon lhal
you are prolicienl wilh, you can choose lo take a -5
penally lo lhe attack roll. If the attack hils, you add +10
to lhe attack's damage.

SHIELD MASTER
Vou use shields notjust for proleclion bul also for
offense. Vou gain lhe following benelils while you are
wielding a shield:
If you lake lhe Attack action on your lurn, you can use
a bonus aclion to lry to shove a crealure wilhin 5 feel
of you wilh your shield.
lf you aren't incapacilated, you can add your shield's AC
bonus lo any Dexlerity saving lhrow you make against
a spell 01' olheI' harmful effect lhat targets only you.
lf you are subjecled lo an effecl lhal allows you lo
make a Dexlerity saving lhruw lo take only half damage, you ean use your reaclion lo lake no dalllage if
you succeed on lhe saving lhrow, interposing your
shield belween yourself and lhe source of lhe effecl.

SKILLED
Vou gain proliciency in any combinalion of three skills
01' lools of you r choice.

SKULKER
Prerequisile: Dexlerily 13 OI' higher
Vou are expert al slinking lhrough shadows. Vou gain
lhe following benelils:
Vou can try to hide when you are lighlly obscured
from the creature frum which you are hiding.
When you are hidden from a crealure and miss il with
a ranged weapon attack, making the attack doesn't
reveal your posilion.
Dilll light docsn'l impose disadvantage on your
Wisdom (Perceplion) checks relying on sighl.

SPELL SNIPER
Prerequisile: Thc abilily lo casl aI leasl one spell
Vou have learned lechniques to enhance your
attacks wilh cerlain kinds of spells, gaining the
following benelils:

'70

PA RT t

I CUSTOlo.11ZATION

OPTlONS

When you caSl a spell lhal requires you to make an
attack roll, lhe spell's range is doubled.
Vour ranged spell attacks ignore half cover and
lhree-quarters cover.
Vou Jearn one canlrip thal requires an attack roll.
Choose lhe canlrip from lhe bard, cJerie, druid, sorcerer, warlock, 01' wizard spelllisl. Vour spellcasting
abilily for lhis cantrip depends on lhe spelllist you
chose from: Charisma for bard, sorcerer, 01' warlock;
Wisdom for cJeric 01' druid; 01' lnlelligence for wizard.

TAVERN BRAWLER
Accuslomed to rough-and-lumble lighling using
whalever weapons happen lo be ai hand, you gain lhe
following benelils:
lncrease your Strenglh 01' Constilulion score by I,
to a maximum of 20.
Vou are prolicienl wilh improvised weapons and
unarmed slrikes.
Vour unarmed strike uses a d4 for damage.
When you hil a creature with an unarmed strike 01' an
improvised weapon on your turn, you can use a bonus
action lOattempl to grapple the targel.

TOUGH
Vour hil point maximum increases by an amount equal
to lwiee your leveI when you gain lhis feal. Whenever
you gain a levei lhereafter, your hit point maximum
increases by an addilional 2 hil poinls.

WAR CASTER
Prerequisile: The abilily lo casl aI leasl one spell
Vou have pracliced casting spells in the midst of
combal, learning lechniques lhal grant you the
following benelils:
Vou have advantage on Conslilulion saving lhrows
lhat you lllake lOmainlain your concenlralion on a
spell when you lake damage.
Vou can perform lhe somatie cOlllponenls of spells
even when you have weapons OI'a shield in one OI'
bolh hands.
When a hoslile crealure's movement provokes an
opportunily attack from you, you can use your reaclion lo casl a spell at lhe creature, ralheI' than making
an opporlunity altack. The spellmusl have a casling
time of 1 aclion and musl larget only lhal crealure.

WEAPON

MASTER

Vou have pracliced extensively with a variely of
weapons, gaining lhe following benelils:
lncrease your Slrength OI'Dexlerily score by 1, lo a
maxilllum of 20.
Vou gain proliciency wilh four weapons of your choiee.

PART2
Playing the Garne

PART 2'

Pl AYING THE

CAME
171

7: USINGABILITY

CHAPTER
IX ABILlTIES

PROVIDE

A QUICK

To determine an ability modifier without consulting
the table, subtract 10 from the ability score and then
divide the total by 2 (round down).
Because ability modifiers affect almost every attack
roll, ability check, and saving throw, ability modifiers
come up in play more often than their associated scores .

DESCRIPTION

of every creature's physical and mental
characteristics:
Strength, measuring physical power
. Dexterity, measuring agility
• Constitution, measuring endurance
Intelligence, measuring reasoning
and memory
Wisdom, measuring perception and insight
Charisma, measuring force of personality

)

ADVANTAGE AND
DISADVANTAGE

Is a character muscle-bound and insightful? Brilliant
and charming? Nimble and hardy? Ability scores
define these qualities-a creature's assets as well
as weaknesses.
The three main rolls of the game-the ability check,
the saving throw, and the attack roll-rely on the six
ability scores. The book's introduction describes the
basic rule behind these rolls: roll a d20, add an ability
modifier derived from one of the six ability scores, and
compare the total to a target number.
This chapter focuses on how to use ability checks
and saving throws, covering the fundamental activities
that creatures attempt in the game. Rules for attack rolls
appear in chapter 9.

ABILITY SCORES AND
MODIFIERS
Each of a creature's abilities has a score. a number that
defines the magnitude of that ability. An ability score
is not just a measure of innate capabilities, but also
encompasses a creature's training and competence in
activities related to that ability.
A score of 10 or II is the normal human average, but
adventurers and many monsters are a cut above average
in most abilities. A score of 18 is the highest that a
person usually reaches. Adventurers can have scores
as high as 20, and monsters and divine beings can have
scores as high as 30.
Each ability also has a modifier, derived from the
score and ranging from -5 (for an ability score of I) to
+10 (for a score of 30). The Ability Scores and Modifiers
table notes the ability modifiers for the range of possible
ability scores, from 1 to 30.
ABILITY

SCORES

ANO

Modifier

Score

Modifier

1
2-3
4-5

-5

16-17

-4
-3
-2
-1

18-19
20-21
22-23
24-25

+3
+4

+0
+1
+2

26-27
28-29

10-11
12-13
14-15

Sometimes a special ability or spell tells you that you
have advantage or disadvantage on an ability check,
a saving throw, or an attack roll. When that happens,
you roll a second d20 when you make the roll. Use the
higher of the two rolls if you have advantage, and use
the lower roll if you have disadvantage. For example, if
you have disadvantage and roll a 17 and a 5, you use the
5. ]f you instead have advantage and roll those numbers,
you use the 17.
]f multi pie situations affect a roll and each one grants
advantage or imposes disadvantage on it, you don't roll
more than one additional d20. Jf two favorable situations
grant advantage, for example, you still roll only one
additional d20.
If circumstances cause a roll to have both advantage
and disadvantage, you are considered to have neither of
them, and you roll one d20. This is true even if multi pie
circumstances impose disadvantage and only one grants
advantage or vice versa. In such a situation, you have
neither advantage nor disadvantage.
When you have advantage or disadvantage and
something in the game, such as the halfling's Lucky
trait, lets you reroll the d20, you can reroll only one
of the dice. Vou choose which one. For example, if a
halfling has advantage on an ability check and rolls
a 1 and a 13, the halfling could use the Lucky trait to
reroll the I.
Vou usually gain advantage or disadvantage through
the use of special abilities, actions, or spells. Inspiration
(see chapter 4) can also give a characler advantage on
checks related to the character's personality, ideais,
or bonds. The DM can also decide that circumstances
influence a roll in one direction or the other and grant
advantage or impose disadvantage as a result.

PROFICIENCY

MOOIFIERS

Score

6-7
8-9

SCORES

30

+5
+6
+7
+8
+9
+10

BONUS

Characters have a proficiency bonus determined by
levei, as detailed in chapter I. Monsters also have this
bonus, which is incorporated in their stat blocks. The
bonus is used in the rules on ability checks, saving
throws, and attack rolls.
Your proficiency bonus can't be added to a single die
roll or other number more than once. For example, if
two different rules say you can add your proficiency
bonus to a Wisdom saving throw, you nevertheless add
the bonus only once when you make the savc.
Occasionally, your proficiency bonus might be
multiplied or divided (doubled or halved, for example)

PART

2

USING

ABILlTY

SCORES

before you apply it. For example, the rogue's Expertise
feature doubles the proficiency bonus for certain ability
checks. If a circumstance suggests that your proficiency
bonus applies more than once to the same roll, you still
add it only once and multiply or divide it only once.
By the same token, if a feature ar effect allows you
to multiply your proficiency bonus when making an
ability check that wouldn't normally benefit from your
proficiency bonus, you still don't add the bonus to the
check. For that check your proficiency bonus is O, given
the fact that multiplying O by any number is still O. For
instance, if you lack proficiency in the History skill,
you gain no benefit from a feature that lets you double
your proficiency bonus when you make Intelligence
(History) checks.
In general, you don't multiply your proficiency bonus
for attack rolls or saving throws. If a feature ar effect
allows you to do so, these same rules apply.

is holding dosed. In situations like these, the outcome
is determined bya special form of ability check,
called a contest.
Both participants in a contest make ability checks
appropriate to their efforts. They apply ali appropriate
bonuses and penalties, but instead of comparing the
total to a DC, they compare the totaIs of their two
checks. The participant with the higher check total wins
the contest. That character ar monster either succeeds
at the action or prevents the other one from succeeding.
If the contest results in a tie, the situation remains the
same as it was before the contest. Thus, one contestant
might win the contest by default. If two characters tie in
a contest to snatch a ring off the fioor, neither character
grabs it. In a contest between a monster trying to open
a doar and an adventurer trying to keep the doar dosed,
a tie means that the door remains shut.

SKILLS

ABILITY

CHECKS

An ahility check tests a character's ar monster's innate
talent and training in an effort to overcome a challenge.
The DM calls for an ability check when a character ar
monster attempts an aclion (other than an attack) that
has a chance of failure. When the outcome is uncertain,
the dice determine the results.
For every ability check, the DM decides which of the six
abilities is relevant to the task at hand and the difficulty
of the task, represented bya Difficulty Class. The more
difficult a task, the higher its DC. The Typical Difficulty
Classes table shows the most common DCs.
TVPICAL

DIFFICULTV

CLASSES

Task Difficulty

DC

Veryeasy
Easy

5
10

Medium

15

Ha~

20

Very hard

25

Nearly impossible

30

To make an ability check, roll a d20 and add the
relevant ability modifier. As with other d20 rolls, apply
bonuses and penalties, and compare the total to the De.
If the total equals or exceeds the DC, the ability check
is a success-the creature overcomes the challenge
at hand. Otherwise, it's a failure, which means the
character or monster makes no progress toward the
objective ar makes progress combined with a setback
determined by the DM.

174

Each ability covers a broad range of capabilities,
induding skills that a character or a monster can be
proficient in. A skill represents a specific aspect of an
ability score, and an individual's proficiency in a skill
demonstrates a focus on that aspect. (A character's
starting skill proficiencies are determined at character
creation, and a monster's skill proficiencies appear in
the monster's stat block.)
For example, a Dexterity check might refiect a
character's attempt to pull off an acrobatic stunt, to paIm
an object, or to stay hidden. Each of these aspects of
Dexterity has an associated skill: Acrobatics, Sleight of
Hand, and Stealth, respectively. So a character who has
proficiency in the Stealth skill is particularly good at
Dexterity checks related to sneaking and hiding.
The skills related to each ability score are shown in
the following list. (No skills are related to Constitution.)
See an ability's description in the later sections of this
chapter for examples of how to use a skill associated
with an ability.
Strength
Athletics
Dexterity
Acrobatics
Sleight of Hand
Stealth

Wisdom
Animal Handling
Insight
Medicine
Perception
Survival
Charisma
Deception
Intimidation
Performance
Persuasion

CONTESTS

Intelligence
Arcana
History
Investigation
Nature
Religion

Sometimes one character's or monster's efforts are
directly apposed to another's. This can accur when both
of them are trying to do the same thing and only one
can succeed, such as attempting to snatch up a magic
ring that has fallen on the fioor. This situation also
applies when ane of them is trying to prevent the other
one from accomplishing a goal-for example, when a
monster tries to force open a doar that an adventurer

Sometimes, the DM might ask for an ability check
using a specific skill-for example, "Make a Wisdom
(Perception) check." At other times, a player might ask
the DM if proficiency in a particular skill applies to a
check. In either case, proficiency in a skill means an
individual can add his ar her proficiency bonus to ability
checks that involve that skill. Without proficiency in the
skill, the individual makes a normal ability check.

PART 2

I USING

ABIUTV

SCORES

For example, if a characler attempts lo climb up a
dangerous cliff, lhe Dungeon Masler mighl ask for a
Slrenglh (Alhlelics) check. lf lhe characler is proficienl
in Athletics, the characler's proficiency bonus is added
to lhe Slrenglh check. lf lhe characler lacks that
proficicncy, he or she JUSlmakes a Slrenglh check.

characler who lacks lhat proficiency can't help anolher
characler in lhal task. Moreover, a character can help
only when two or more individuais working logelher
would aclually be produclive. Some lasks, such as
lbreading a needle. are no easier with help.

VARIANT:

When a number of individuais are lrying to accomplish
somelhing as a group, lhe DM mighl ask for a group
abilily check. In such a situalion, lhe characters who are
skilled ai a parlicular task help cover those who aren'l.
To make a group ability check. everyone in lbe group
makes lbe abilily check. lf alleasl half lhe group
sllcceeds, the wbole group succeeds. Otherwise,
lhe group fails.
Group checks don't come up very often. and lhey're
most useful wben ali lhe characlers succeed or
fail as a group. For example, when advenlurcrs arc
navigating a swamp, lbe DM mighl call for a group
Wisdom (Survival) check lo see if lhe characlers can
avoid lhe quicksand, sinkholcs, and other natural
hazards of lhe environmenl. If at least half the group
succeeds, lhe successful characlers are ablc to guide
lhcir companions oul of danger. Olherwise, lhe group
slumbles inlo one of lhese hazards.

GROUP CHECKS
SKILLS WITH DIFFERENT

ABILITIES

Normally, your proficiency in a skill applies only lo a
specific kind of abilily check. Proficiency in Alhlelics,
for example, usually applics lo Slrenglh checks. In some
situations, lhough, your proficiency mighl reasonably
apply lo a differenl kind of check. In such cases, lhe DM
mighl ask for a check using an unusual combinalion of
abilily and skill, or you mighl ask your DM if you can
applya proficiency to a differenl check. For example,
if you have lo swim from an offshore island to lhe
mainland, your DM mighl call for a Conslilulion check
lo see if you have the stamina lo make it that faroIn lhis
case, your DM mighl allow you to apply your proficiency
in Alhlelics and ask for a Constilulion (Alhlelics) check.
So ifyou're proficienl in Alhlelics, you apply your
proficiency honus to lhe Conslilulion checkjusl as you
would normally do for a Slrenglh (Alhlelics) check.
SimilarIy, when your half-orc barbarian uses a display
of raw slrenglh to inlimidale an enemy, your DM mighl
ask for a Strength (Inlimidalion) check, evenlhough
Intimidalion is normally associaled wilh Charisma.

PASSIVE CHECKS
A passive check is a special kind of abilily check lhal
doesn'l involve any die rolls. Such a check can represenl
lhe average resull for a task done repealedly, such as
searching for secrel doors over and over again. or can
be used when the DM wanls lo secretly determine
whelher lhe characters succeed at something wilholll
rolling dice, such as nOlicing a hidden monsler.
Here's how lo delermine a character's lolal for a
passive check:
10 + ali modifiers

thal normally apply to the check

If the characler has advanlage on lhe check, add 5. For
disadvanlage, suhlract 5. The game refers lo a passive
check lotai as a score.
For example. if a 1st-levei character has a Wisdom of
15 and proficiency in Perceplion. he or she has a passive
Wisdom (Perceplion) score of 14.
The rules on hiding in lhe "Dexlerily" section below
rely on passive cbecks, as do lhe exploralion rules
in chapler 8.

WORKING

TOGETHER

Some times lwo or more characlers leam up to allempt a
lask. The characler who's leading lhe effort-or lhe one
wilb lhe highesl abilily modifier-can make an ability
cbeck wilh advanlage, reflecling the help provided by
the olher characlers. In combal, lhis requires lhe Help
aclion (see chapler 9).
A character can only provide help if lhe lask is one lhat
he or she cOllld allempt alone. For example, trying lo
open a lock requires proficiency wilh lhieves' lools, so a

U SING EACH ABILITY
Every lask lhal a characler or monsler mighl atlempt
in the game is covered by one of lhe six abililies. This
seclion explains in more delail wbal lhose abilities
mean and the ways lhey are used in lhe game.

STRENGTH
Slrenglh measures bodily power, athlelic training, and
the exlenllo which you can exert raw physical force.
STRENGTH

CHECKS

A Slrenglh check can model any atlempllo lifl, p"sh,
pull, or break something, lo force your body lhrougb a
space, or lo otherwise apply brute force lo a silualion.
The Alhlelics skill reflecls aptitude in cerlain kinds of
Slrength checks.
Athletics. Your Strenglh (Alhlelics) check covers
difficult situations YOllencollnler while c1imbing,
jumping. or swimming. Examples include tbe
following aclivilies:
You attempt lo climh a sheer or slippery cliff, avoid
hazards while scaling a wall, or cling lo a surface
while something is lrying to knock you off.
You try lo jump an unuslIally long distance or pull
off a slunl midjump.
You slruggle lo swim or slay afloal in lreacherous currenls, slorm-lossed waves, or areas of lhick seaweed.
Or anolher crealure lries lo push or pull you underwaler or olherwise interfere with your swimming.
Other Strength Checks. The DM mighl also call for
a Slrcngtb check when you lry to accomplish tasks like
lhe following:

PART 2

LJSL G -\BILlIT

S i)RE

Force open a stuck, locked, or barred door
Break free of bonds
Push through a tunnel that is too small
Hang on to a wagon while being dragged behind it
Tip over a statue
Keep a boulder from rolling
ATTACK ROLLS AND DAMAGE

Vou add your Strength modifier to your attack roll and
your damage roll when attacking with a melee weapon
such as a mace, a battleaxe, or a javelin. Vou use
melee weapons to make melee attacks in hand-to-hand
combat, and some of them can be thrown to make a
ranged attack.
LIFTING

AND CARRYING

Vour Strength score determines the amount ofweight
you can bear. The following terms define what you can
lift or carry.
Carrying Capacity. Vour carrying capacity is your
Strength score multiplied by 15. This is the weight (in
pounds) that you can carry, which is high enough that
most characlers don't usually have to worry about it.
Push, Drag, ar Lirt. Vou can push, drag, or lift a
weighl in pounds up to lwice your carrying capacity
(or 30 times your Slrength score). While pushing or
dragging wcight in excess ofyour carrying capacity,
your speed drops lo 5 fee!.
Size and Strength. Larger crealures can bear more
weighl, whereas Tiny creatures can carry less. For
each size calegory above Medium, double lhe creature's
carrying capacity and lhe amount il can push, drag, or
lif!. For a Tiny creature, halve lhese weighls.

'j6

PART 2 I USING ABILlTY

soaREs

VARIANT:

ENCUMBRANCE

The rules for lifling and carrying are inlentionally
simple. Here is a variant ifyou are looking for more
detailed rules for delermining how a characler is
hindered by the weighl of equipmen!. When you use this
varianl, ignore lhe Strength column of the Armor table
in chapter 5.
If you carry weight in excess of 5 times your Strength
score, you are encumbered, which means your speed
drops by 10 fee!.
If you carry weighl in excess of 10 times your
Slrenglh score, up to your maximum carrying capacity,
you are instead heavily encumbered, which means your
speed drops by 20 feet and you have disadvanlage on
ability checks, attack rolls, and saving throws that use
Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution.

DEXTERITY
Dexterily measures agility, reflexes, and balance.
DEXTERITY

CHECKS

A Dexterity check can model any attempt to move
nimbly, quickly, or quietly, or to keep from falling
on tricky footing. The Acrobatics, Sleight of Hand,
and Stealth skills reflect aptitude in certain kinds of
Dexterity checks.
Acrobatics. Vour Dexterity (Acrobatics) check covers
your attempt to stay on your feet in a tricky situation,
such as when you're trying to run across a sheet of ice,
balance on a tightrope, or stay upright on a rocking
ship's deck. The DM might also call for a Dexterity
(Acrobatics) check to see if you can perform acrobatic
stunts, including dives, rolls, somersaults, and flips.

Sleight af Hand. Whenever you attempt an act of
legerdemain or manual triekery, such as planting
something on someone else or concealing an object on
yaur person, make a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check.
The DM might also call for a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand)
check to determine whether you can lift a coin purse off
another person or slip something out of another
person's pocket.
SteaJth. Make a Dexterity (Stealth) check when you
attempt to conceal yourself from enemies, slink past
guards, slip away without being notieed, or sneak up on
someone without being seen or heard.
Other Dexterity Checks. The DM might call for a
Dexterity check when you try to accomplish tasks like
the following:

ATTACK ROLLS AND DAMAGE

Vou add your Dexterity modifier to your attack roll and
your damage roll when attacking with a ranged weapon,
such as a sling or a longbow. Vou can also add your
Dexterity modifier to your attack roll and your damage
roll when attacking with a melee weapon that has the
finesse property, such as a dagger or a rapier.

~

HIDING

When you try to hide, make a Dexterity (Stealth) check. Until
you are discovered or you stop hiding, that check's total is
contested by the Wisdom (Perception)
check of any creature
that actively searches for signs of your presence.
You can't hide from a creature that can see you. and if you
make noise (such as shouting a warning or knocking over a
vase), you give away your position. An invisible creature can't
be seen, 50 it can always try to hide. Signs of its passage
might still be noticed, however, and it still has to stay quiet.
In combat, most creatures stay alert for signs of danger
ali around, 50 if you come out of hiding and approach
a creature, it usually sees you. However, under certain
circumstances,
the Dungeon Master might allow you to stay
hidden as you approach a creature that is distracted, allowing
you to gain advantage on an attack before you are seen.
Passive Pereeptian. When you hide, there's a chance
someone will notice you even if they aren't searching. To
determine whether such a creature notices you, the DM
compares your Dexterity (Stealth) check with that creature's
passive Wisdom (Perception)
score, which equals 10 + the
creature's Wisdom modifier, as well as any other bonuses
or penalties. Ifthe creature has advantage, add 5. For
disadvantage,
subtract 5.
For example, if a lst.level character (with a proficiency
bonus of +2) has a Wisdom of 15 (a +2 modifier) and
proficiency in Perception, he or she has a passive Wisdom
(Perception) of 14.

INITlATIVE

At the beginning of every combat, you roll initiative
by making a Dexterity check. lnitiative determines
the order of creatures' turos in combat, as described
in chapter 9.

CONSTITUTION
Constitution measures health, stamina, and vital force.
CONSTlTUTlON

CHECKS

Hold your breath
March or labor for hours without rest
Go without sleep
Survive without food or water
Quaff an entire stein of ale in one go
HIT POINTS

Your Constitution modifier contributes to your hit
points. Typieally, you add your Constitution modifier to
each Hit Die you roll for your hit points.
Ifyour Constitution modifier changes, your hit point
maximum changes as well, as though you had the new
modifier from 1st leveI. For example, if Yotl raise your
Constittltion score when you reach 4th levei and your
Constitution modifier increases from +1 to +2, you
adjust your hit point maximum as though the modifier
had always been +2. So you add 3 hit points for your
first three leveis, and then roll your hit points for 4th
levei using your new modifier. Or if you're 7th levei and
some effect lowers your Constitution score so as to
reduce your Constitution modifier by 1, Yotlr hit point
maximum is reduced by 7.

INTELLIGENCE
lntelligence measures mental acuity. accuracy of recall,
and the ability to reason.
INTELLIGENCE

What Can You See? One of the main factors in determining
whether you can find a hidden creature or object is how well
you can see in an area, which might be lightly or heavily
obscured, as explained in chapter 8.

~

Depending on the armor you wear, you might add some
or alI of your Dexterity modifier to your Armor Class,
as described in chapter 5.

Constitution checks are uncommon, and no skills apply
to Constitution checks, because the endurance this
ability represents is largely passive rather than involving
a specific effort on the part of a character or monster.
A Constitution check can model your attempt to push
beyond normallimits, however.
The DM might call for a Constitution check when you
try to accomplish tasks like the following:

Control a heavily Jaden cart on a steep descent
Steer a chariot around a tight turo
Pick a lock
Disable a trap
Securely tie up a prisoner
Wriggle free of bonds
Playa stringed instrument
Craft a small or detailed object

4

ARMOR CLASS

~

CHECKS

An lntelligence check comes into play when you need
to draw on logie, education, memory, or deductive
reasoning. The Arcana, History, Investigation, Nature,
and Religion skills reflect aptitude in certain kinds of
lntelligence checks.
Arcana. Your Intelligence (Arcana) check measures
your ability to recalllore about spells, magie items,
e1dritch symbols, magical traditions, the planes of
existence, and the inhabitants of those planes.
History. Your Intelligence (History) check measures
your ability to recalllore about historieal events,
PART 2

I USING

AB1LlTY

SCORES

4

legendary people, ancient kingdoms, past disputes,
recent wars, and lost civilizations.
Investil1ation. When you look araund for clues and
make deductions based on those clues. you make an
Intelligence (Investigation) check. Vou might deduce the
location of a hidden object, discern fram the appearance
of a wound what kind of weapon dealt it, or determine
the weakest point in a tunnelthat could cause itto
collapse. Poring through ancient scralls in search of
a hidden fragment of knowledge might also call for an
Intelligence (Investigalion) check.
Nature. Vour Intelligence (Nature) check measures
your ability to recalllore aboutterrain, plants and
animais, the weather. and natural cycles.
ReJil1ion. Vour Intelligence (Religion) check measures
your ability to recalllore about deities, rites and prayers,
religious hierarchies, holy symbols, and the practices
of secret cults.
Other InteJlil1ence Checks. The DM might call for an
Intelligence check when you try to accomplish tasks like
the following:
Communicate with a creature without using words
Estimate the value of a precious item
Pulltogether a disguise to pass as a city guard
Forge a document
Recalllore about a craft or trade
Win a game of skill
SPELLCASTING

ABILITY

Wizards use Intelligence as their spellcasting ability,
which helps determine the saving throw DCs of
spells they cas!.
WISDOM
Wisdom reflects how attuned you are to the world
around you and represents perceptiveness and intuition.
WISDOM

CHECKS

A Wisdom check might reflect an effort to read body
language, understand someone's feelings, notice things
aboutthe environment, or care for an injured person.
The Animal Handling, Insight, Medicine, Perception,
and Survival skills reflect aptitude in certa in kinds of
Wisdom checks.
Animal HandJinl1. When there is any question
whether you can calm down a domesticated animal,
keep a mount fram getting spooked, or intuit an animal's
intentions, the DM might call for a Wisdom (Animal
Handling) check. Vou also make a Wisdom (Animal
Handling) check to contrai your mount when you attempt
a risky maneuver.
Insil1ht. Vour Wisdom (Insight) check decides whether
you can determine the true intentions of a creature, such
as when searching out a lie or predicting someone's
next move. Doing so involves gleaning clues fram body
language, speech habits, and changes in mannerisms.
Medicine. A Wisdom (Medicine) check lets you try to
stabilize a dying companion or diagnose an illness.
Perception. Vour Wisdom (Perception) check lets
you spot, hear, or otherwise detect the presence of
something. It measures your general awareness of
your surroundings and the keenness ofyour senses.
PART 2

I USING

ABILITY

se ORES

FINDING

A HIDDEN

OB)ECT

••

When your characler searches for a hidden objecl such as
a secrel doar or a lrap, lhe DM lypically asks you lo make a
Wisdom (Perceplion) check. Such a check can be used lo find
hidden delalls or olher informalion and clues lhal you mighl
olherwise overlook.
In mosl cases, you need lo describe where you are looking
in order for lhe DM lo delermine your chance of success. For
example, a key is hidden benealh a seI of folded clolhes in
lhe lop drawer of a bureau. If you lell lhe DM lhal you pace
around lhe room, looking aI lhe walls and fumilure for clues,
you have no chance of finding lhe key, regardless of your
Wisdom (Perceplion) check resull. Vou would have lo specify
lhal you were opening lhe drawers or searching lhe bureau in
order lo have any chance of success.

,.

•••

For example, you mighl try to hear a conversation
through a closed door, eavesdrap under an open window,
or hear monslers moving slealthily in the fores!. Or you
might try lo spol lhings that are obscured or easy to
miss, whether they are orcs Iying in ambush on a road,
lhugs hiding in lhe shadows of an alley, or candlelight
under a closed secret door.
Survival. The DM might ask you to make a Wisdom
(Survival) check to follow tracks, hunt wild game, guide
your group through frazen waslelands, identify signs
that owlbears live nearby, predict the weather, or avoid
quicksand and olher natural hazards.
Other Wisdom Checks. The DM mighl call for a
Wisdom check when you try to accomplish tasks like
the following:
Gel a gul feeling about what course of action lo follow
Discern whether a seemingly dead or living creature
is undead
SPELLCASTING

ABILITY

Clerics, druids, and rangers use Wisdom as their
spellcasting ability, which helps determine the saving
throw DCs of spells they cas!.
CHARISMA
Charisma measures your ability to interact effectively
with others. It includes such factors as confidence
and eloquence, and it can represent a charming or
commanding personality.
CHARISMA

CHECKS

A Charisma check might arise when you lry to influence
or entertain others, when you try to make an impression
or tell a convincing lie, or when you are navigating a
tricky social situation. The Deception, Intimidation,
Performance, and Persuasion skills reflect aptitude in
certain kinds of Charisma checks.
Deception. Vour Charisma (Deception) check
determines whether you can convincingly hide the
trulh, eilher verbally or lhrough your actions. This
deception can encompass everything fram misleading
others through ambiguity to telling outright lies. Typical
situations include trying to fast-talk a guard, con a
merchanl, earn money through gambling, pass yourself
off in a disguise, dull someone's suspicions with false
assurances, or maintain a straight face while telling
a blatantlie.

Intimidation. When you attempt to influence someone
through overt threats, hostile actions, and physical
violence, the DM might ask you to make a Charisma
(Intimidation) check. Examples include trying to pry
information out of a prisoner, convincing street thugs
to back down from a confrontation, ar using the edge of
a broken bottle to convince a sneering vizier to
reconsider a decision.
Performance. Your Charisma (Performance) check
determines how well you can delight an audience with
music, dance, acting, storytelling, ar some other form of
entertainment.
Persuasion. When you attempt to influence someone
or a group of people with tact. social graces, ar good
nature, the DM might ask you to make a Charisma
(Persuasion) check. Typically, you use persuasion when
acting in good faith, to foster friendships, make cordial
requests, ar exhibit proper etiquette. Examples of
persuading others include convincing a chamberlain to
let your party see the king, negotiating peace between
warring tribes, ar inspiring a crowd of townsfolk.
Other Charisma Checks. The DM might call for a
Charisma check when you try to accomplish tasks like
the following:
Find the best person to talk to for news, rumors,
and gossip
Blend into a crowd to get the sense of key topics
of conversation
SPELLCASTING

ABILITY

Bards, paladins, sorcerers. and warlocks use Charisma
as their spellcasting ability, which helps determine the
saving throw DCs of spells they cast.

SAVING THROWS
A saving throw-also called a save-represents
an
attempt to resist a spell, a trap, a poison, a disease, ar
a similar threat. Vou don't normally decide to make a
saving throw; you are forced to make one because your
character ar monster is at risk of harm.
To make a saving throw, roll a d20 and add the
appropriate ability modifier. For example, you use your
Dexterity modifier for a Dexterity saving throw.
A saving throw can be modified by a situational
bonus ar penalty and can be affected byadvantage
and disadvantage, as determined by the DM.
Each class gives proficiency in at least two saving
throws. The wizard, for example, is proficient
in Intelligence saves. As with skill proficiencies,
proficiency in a saving throw lets a character add his
ar her proficiency bonus to saving throws made using
a particular ability score. Some monsters have saving
throw proficiencies as well.
The Difficulty Class for a saving throw is determined
by the effect that causes it. For example, the DC for a
saving throw allowed bya spell is determined by the
caster's spellcasting ability and proficiency bonus.
The result of a successful ar failed saving throw is
also detailed in the effeel that allows the save. Usually,
a successful save means that a creature suffers no
harm, ar reduced harm, from an effect.

CHAPTER

8: ADVENTURING

ELVING INTO THE ANCIENT TOMB or HORRORS.
slipping through the back alleys of
Waterdeep, hacking a fresh trail through
the thick jungles on the Isle of Dread-these
are the things that DUNGEONS& DRAGONS
adventures are made of. Your character in
the game might explore forgotten ruins and
uncharted lands, uncover dark secrets and sinister
plots, and slay foul monsters. And if ali goes well, your
character will survive to claim rich rewards before
embarking on a new adventure.
This chapter covers the basics of the adventuring life,
from the mechanics of movement to the complexities of
social interaction. The rules for resting are also in this
chapter, along with a discussion of the activities your
character might pursue between adventures.
Whether adventurers are exploring a dusty dungeon
or the complex relationships of a royal court, the game
follows a natural rhythm, as outlined in the book's
introduction:

I. The DM describes the environmenl.
2. The players describe what they want to do.
3. The DM narrates the results of their actions.
Typically, the DM uses a map as an outline of the
adventure, tracking the characters' progress as they
explore dungeon corridors or wilderness regions.
The DM's notes, including a key to thc map, describe
what the adventurers lind as they enter each new area.
Sometimes, the passage of time and the adventurers'
actions determine what happens, so the DM might
use a timeline or a flowchart to track their progress
instead of a map.

TIME
In situations where keeping track of the passage of
time is important, the DM determines the time a task
requires. The DM might use a different time scale
depending on the context of the situation at hand. In
a dungeon environment, the adventurers' movement
happens on a scale of minutes. lt takes them about a
minute to creep down a long hallway, another minute
to check for traps on the door at the end of the hall, and
a good ten minutes to search the chamber beyond for
anything interesting or valuable.
In a city or wilderness, a scale of hours is often more
appropriate. Adventurers eager to rcach the lonely tower
at the heart of the forest hurry across those fifteen miles
in just under four hours' time.
For long journeys, a scale of days works besl.
Following the road from Baldur's Gate to Waterdeep, the
adventurers spend four uneventful days before a goblin
ambush interrupts their journey.
In combat and other fast-paced situations, the game
relies on rounds, a 6-second span of time described
in chapter 9.

MOVEMENT
Swimming across a rushing river, sneaking down a
dungeon corridor, scaling a treacherous mountain slopeali sorts of movement play a key role in D&D adventures.
The DM can summarize the adventurers' movement
without calculating exact distances or traveI times: "You
travei through the forest and find the dungeon entrance
late in the evening of the third day." Even in a dungeon,
particularlya large dungeon or a cave network, the
DM can summarize movement between encounters:
"After killing the guardian at the entrance to the ancient
dwarven stronghold, you consult your map, which leads
you through miJes of echoing corridors to a chasm
bridged bya narrow stone arch."
Sometimes it's important, though, to know how long
it takes to get from one spot to another, whether the
answer is in days, hours, or minutes. The rules for
determining traveI time depend on two factors: the
speed and traveI pace of the creatures moving and the
terrain they're moving over.

SPEED
Every character and monster has a speed, which is
the distance in feet that the character or monster
can walk in 1 round. This number assumes short
bursts of energetic movement in the midst of a lifethreatening situation.
The following rules determine how far a character
or monster can move in a minute, an hour, or a day.
TRAVEL

PACE

While traveling, a group of adventurers can move at a
normal, fast, or slow pace, as shown on the Travei Pace
table. The table states how far the party can move in a
period of time and whether the pace has any effecl. A
fast pace makes characters less perceptive, while a slow
pace makes it possible to sneak around and to search an
area more carefully (see the "Activity While Traveling"
section later in this chapter for more information).
Forced March. The Travei Pace table assumes that
characters traveI for 8 hours in day. They can push on
beyond that limit, at the risk of exhaustion.
For each additional hour of traveI beyond 8 hours,
the characters cover the distance shown in the Hour
column for their pace, and each character must make
a Constitution saving throw at the end of the hour. The
DC is 10 + 1 for each hour past 8 hours. On a failed
saving throw, a character suffers one leveI of exhaustion
(see appendix A).
Mounts and Vehicles. For short spans of time (up
to an hour), many animaIs move much faster than
humanoids. A mounted character can ride at a gallop
for about an hour, covering twice the usual distance for
a fast pace. If fresh mounts are available every 8 to 10
miles, characters can cover larger distances at this pace,
but this is very rare except in uensely populated areas.

PAR1

2 I ADVEN1URINC

181

Characters in wagons, carriages, or other land
vehicles choose a pace as normal. Characters in a
waterborne vessel are limited to the speed of the vessel
(see chapter 5), and they don't suffer penalties for a fast
pace or gain benefits from a slow pace, Depending on
the vessel and the size of the crew, ships might be able
to travei for up to 24 hours per day,
Certain speciai mounts, such as a pegasus or griffon,
or special vehicles, such as a carpet of f!ying, allow you
to traveI more swiftly, The Dungeon Master's Cuide
contains more information on special methods of traveI.
TRAVEL

(Perception) scores

DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check to clear a low obstacle
(no taller than a quarter of the jump's distance), such as
a hedge or low wall. Otherwise. you hit it.
When you land in difficult terrain. you must succeed
on a DC 10 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check to land on your
feet. Otherwise. you land prone.
HighJump. When you make a high jump. you leap
into the air a number of feet equal to 3 + your Strength
modifier ifyou move at least 10 feet on foot immediately
before the jump. When you make a standing high jump,
you can jump only half that distance. Either way, each
foot you clear on the jump costs a foot of movement. In
some circumstances. your DM might allow you to make
a Strength (Athletics) check to jump higher than you
normally cano
Vou can extend your arms half your height above
yourself during the jump. Thus. you can reach above
you a distance equal to the height of the jump plus 1Vi
times your height.

Able lo use stealth

ACTIVITY WHILE TRAVELING

PACE

Distance Traveled per, , .
Pace

Minute

Hour

Day

Fast

400 feet

4 miles

30 miles

Normal
Slow

300 feel
200 feel

3 miles
2 miles

24 miles
18 miles

DIFFICULT

Effect
-5 penalty to
passive Wisdom

TERRAIN

The traveI speeds given in the Travei Pace table
assume relatively simple terrain: roads, open plains,
or clear dungeon corridors. But adventurers often face
dense forests, deep swamps, rubble-filled ruins, steep
mountains, and ice-covered ground-all considered
difficult terrain.
Vou move at half speed in difficult terrain-moving
1 foot in difficult terrain costs 2 feet of speed-so you
can cover only half the normal distance in a minute.
an hour, or a day.

SPECIAL TYPES OF MOVEMENT
Movement through dangerous dungeons or wilderness
areas often involves more than simply walking.
Adventurers might have to climb, crawl. swim, or jump
to get where they need to go.
CUMBING,

SWIMMING.

AND CRAWUNG

While climbing or swimming, each foot of movement
costs 1 extra foot (2 extra feet in difficult terrain). unless
a creature has a climbing or swimming speed. At the
DM's option, climbing a slippery vertical surface or
one with few handholds requires a successful Strength
(Athletics) check. Similarly, gaining any distance in
rough water might require a successful Strength
(Athletics) check.
jUMPING

Your Strength determines how far you can jump.
LongJump. When you make a 10ngjump. you cover a
number of feet up to your Strength score if you move at
leasl 10 feet 011fool immedialely before the jump. When
you make a standing long jump, you can leap only half
that distance. Eilher way, each fool you clear on the
jump costs a foot of movement.
This rule assumes that the heighl of your jump
doesn't maller. such as a jump across a stream or
chasm. At your DM's option, you must succeed on a

PART 2 I ADVENTURINO

As adventurers travei through a dungeon or the
wilderness, they need to remain alert for danger, and
some characters might perform other tasks to help
the group's journey.
MARCHING

ORDER

The adventurers should establish a marching order.
A marching order makes it easier to determine which
characters are affected by traps. which ones can spot
hidden enemies, and which ones are the closest to those
enemies when a fight breaks out.
A character might occupy the front rank. one or more
middle ranks. or the back rank. Characters in the front
and back ranks need enough room to travei side by
side with others in their rank. When space is toa tight,
the marching order must change, usually by moving
characters to a middle rank.
Fewer Than Three Ranks. If an adventuring party
arranges its marching order with only two ranks, they
are a front rank and a back rank. If there's only one rank,
it's considered a front rank.
STEALTH

While traveling at a slow pace. the characters can move
stealthily. As long as they're not in the open, they can try
to surprise or sneak by other creatures they encounter.
See the rules for hiding in chapter 7.
NOTICING

THREATS

Use the passive Wisdom (Perception) scores of the
characters to determine whether anyone in the group
notices a hidden threat. The DM might decide that a
threat can be noticed only by characters in a particular
rank. For example, as the characters are exploring a
maze of tunnels. the DM might decide that only those
characters in the back rank have a chance to hear or
spot a stealthy creature following the group, while
characters in the front and middle ranks cannot.
While traveling at a fast pace. characters take a -5
penalty to their passive Wisdom (Perception) scores
to notice hidden threats.

4
Encountering Creatures. If the DM determines
that the adventurers eneounter other ereatures while
they're traveling, it's up to both groups to decide what
happens next. Either group might decide to attaek,
initiate a eonversation, run away, or wait to see what the
other group does.
Surprising Foes. If the adventurers eneounter a
hostile ereature or group, the DM determines whether
the adventurers or their foes might be surprised when
eombat erupts. See ehapter 9 for more about surprise.
OTHER

ACTIVITIES

Charaeters who turn their attention to other tasks as the
group travels are not foeused on watehing for danger.
These eharaeters don't eontribute their passive Wisdom
(Pereeption) seores to the group's chance of noticing
hidden threats. However, a eharaeter not watehing for
danger ean do one of the following aetivities instead, or
some other aetivity with the DM's permission.
Navigate. The eharaeter ean try to prevent the group
from beeoming 10st, making a Wisdom (Survival) eheek
when the DM ealls for it. (The Dungeon Master's Cuide
has rules to determine whether the group gets lost.)
Drawa Map. The eharaeter ean draw a map
that reeords the group's progress and helps the
eharaeters get baek on eourse if they get 10st. No ability
eheek is required.
Track. A eharaeter ean follow the traeks of another
ereature, making a Wisdom (Survival) eheek when the
DM ealls for it. (The Dungeon Master's Cuide has rules
for traeking.)
Forage. The eharaeter ean keep an eye out for ready
sourees of food and water, making a Wisdom (Survival)
eheek when the DM ealls for it. (The Dungeon Master's
Cuide has rules for foraging.)

THE ENVIRONMENT
By its nature, adventuring involves delving into plaees
that are dark, dangerous, and full of mysteries to be
explored. The rules in this seetion eover some of the
most important ways in whieh adventurers interaet with
the environment in sueh plaees. The Dungeon Master's
Cuide has rules eovering more unusual situations.

FALLING
A fali from a great height is one of the most eommon
hazards facing an adventurer.
At the end of a fali, a ereature takes Id6 bludgeoning
damage for every 10 feet it fell, to a maximum of 20d6.
The ereature lands prone, unless it avoids taking
damage from the fali.

SUFFOCATING
A ereature ean hold its breath for a number of minutes
equal to I + its Constitution modifier (minimum
of 30 seeonds).
When a ereature runs out of breath, it ean survive for
a number of rounds equal to its Constitution modifier
(minimum I round). At the start of its next turn, it drops
to O hit points and is dying.

SPLITTING

•
Up THE

PARTY

Sometimes,
it makes sense to split an adventuring
party,
espeeially if you wanl one or more eharaelers lo seoul ahead.
You ean form mulliple parties, eaeh moving at a different speed.
Eaeh group has ils own fronl, middle, and baek ranks.
lhe drawbaek lo lhis approaeh is lhal lhe party will be splil
inlo several smaller groups in lhe evenl of an allack. lhe
advanlage is lhal a small group of sleallhy eharaelers moving
slowly mighl be able lO sneak pasl enemies lhal c1umsier
eharaelers would alerl. A rogue and a monk moving at a slow
paee are mueh harder to deteel when lhey leave lheir dwarf
paladin friend behind.

...•--------------------- ..•.
For example, a ereature with a Constitution of 14 ean
hold its breath for 3 minutes. If it starts suffoeating. it
has 2 rounds to reaeh air before it drops to O hit points.

VISION AND LIGHT
The most fundamental tasks of adventuring-noticing
danger, finding hidden objeets, hitting an enemy in
eombat, and targeting a spell, to name just a fewrely heavily on a eharaeter's ability to see. Darkness
and other effeets that obseure vision can prove a
signifieant hindranee.
A given area might be Iightly or heavily obseured. In
a Iightly obscured area, sueh as dim light, patehy fog,
or moderate foliage, ereatures have disadvantage on
Wisdom (Pereeption) eheeks that rely on sight.
A heavi1y obscured area-sueh as darkness, opaque
fog, or dense foliage-bloeks vision entireIy. A ereature
in a heavily obseured area effeetively suffers from the
blinded eondition (see appendix A).
The presenee or absenee of Iight in an environment
ereates three eategories of illumination: bright Iight, dim
Iight, and darkness.
Bright Iight lets most ereatures see normally. Even
gloomy days provide bright light, as do torehes, lanterns,
fires, and other sourees of illumination within a
specifie radius.
Dim Iight, also ealled shadows, ereates a Iightly
obseured area. An area of dim Iight is usually a
boundary between a souree of bright Iight, sueh as
a toreh, and surrounding darkness. The soft Iight
of twilight and dawn also eounts as dim Iight. A
particularly brilliant full moon might bathe the land
in dim Iight.
Darkness ereates a heavily obseured area. Charaeters
face darkness outdoors at night (even most moonlit
nights). within the confines of an unlit dungeon or a
subterranean vault, or in an area of magieal darkness.
BLlNDSIGHT

A ereature with blindsight ean pereeive its surroundings
without relying on sight, within a specifie radius.
Creatures without eyes, sue h as oozes, and ereatures
with eeholoeation or heightened senses, sueh as bats
and true dragons, have this sense.
DARKVISION

Many ereatures in the worlds of O&D, espeeially those
that dwell underground. have darkvision. Within a
specified range, a ereature with darkvision ean see in

PART

2 I ADVEN""l URING

darkness as if the darkness were dim light, so areas
of darkness are only lightly obscured as far as that
creature is concerned. However, the creature can't
discern color in darkness, only shades of gray.
TRUESIGHT

A creature with truesight can, out to a specific range,
see in normal and magical darkness, see invisible
creatures and objects, automatically detect visual
illusions and succeed on saving throws against them,
and perceives the original form of a shapechanger or
a creature that is transformed by magic. Furthermore,
the creature can see into the Ethereal Plane.

FOOD AND WATER
Characters who don't eat or drink suffer the effects of
exhaustion (see appendix A). Exhaustion caused by lack
of food or water can't be removed until the character
eats and drinks the full required amount.
FOOD

A character needs one pound of food per day and can
make food last longer by subsisting on half rations.
Eating half a pound of food in a day counts as half a day
without food.
A character can go without food for a number of days
equal to 3 + his or her Constitution modifier (minimum
I). At the end of each day beyond that limit, a character
automatically suffers one levei of exhaustion.
A normal day of eating resets the count of days
without food to zero.
WATER

A character needs one gallon of water per day, or two
gallons per day if the weather is hot. A character who
drinks only half that much water must succeed on a
DC 15 Constitution saving throw or suffer one leveI of
exhaustion at the end of the day. A character with access
to even Icss watcr automatically suffers one levei of
exhaustion at the end of the day.
If the character already has one or more leveis of
exhaustion, the character takes two leveis in either case.

INTERACTING

cano The DM determines an object's Armor Class and
hit points, and might decide that certain objects have
resistance or immunity to certain kinds of attacks. (lt's
hard to cut a rope with a club, for example.) Objects
always fail Strength and Dexterity saving throws, and
they are immune to effects that require other saves.
When an object drops to O hit points, it breaks.
A character can also attempt a Strength check to
break an object. The DM sets the DC for any such check.

SOCIAL

INTERACTION

Exploring dungeons, overcoming obstacles, and slaying
monsters are key parts of D&D adventures. No less
important, though, are the social interactions that
adventurers have with other inhabitants of the world.
Interaction takes on many forms. Vou might need
to convince an unscrupulous thief to confess to some
malfeasance, or you might try to fialter a dragon so that
it will spare your life. The DM assumes the roles of any
characters who are participating in the interaction that
don't belong to another player at the table. Any such
character is called a nonplayer character (NPC).
In general terms, an NPC's altitude toward you is
described as friendly, indifferent, or hostile. Friendly
NPCs are predisposed to help you, and hostile ones are
inclined to get in your way. It's easier to get what you
want from a friendly NPC, of course.
Social interactions have two primary aspects:
roleplaying and ability checks.

ROLEPLAYING
Roleplaying is, literally, the act of playing out a role.
In this case, it'syou as a player determining how your
character thinks, acts, and talks.
Roleplaying is a part of every aspect of the game,
and it comes to the fore during social interactions.
Your character's quirks, mannerisms, and personality
infiuence how interactions resolve.
There are two styles you can use when roleplaying
your character: the descriptive approach and the active
approach. Most players use a combination of the two
styles. Use whichever mix of the two works best for YOU.

WITH OBJECTS

A character's interaction with objects in an environment
is often simple to resolve in the game. The player tells
the DM that his or her character is doing something,
such a moving a lever, and the DM describes what, if
anything happens.
For example, a character might decide to pull a lever,
which might, in turn, raise a portcullis, cause a room to
fiood with water, or open a secret door in a nearby wall.
If the lever is rusted in position, though, a character
might need to force it. In such a situation, the DM might
call for a Strength check to see whether the character
can wrench the lever into place. The DM sets the DC for
any such check based on the difficulty of the task.
Characters can also damage objects with their
weapons and spells. Objects are immune to poison and
psychic damage, but otherwise they can be affected
by physical and magical attacks much like creatures

DESCRIPTIVE

ApPROACH

TO ROLEPLAYING

With this approach, you describe your character's words
and actions to the DM and the other players. Drawing on
your mental image of your character, you tell everyone
what your character does and how he or she does it.
For instance, Chris plays Tordek the dwarf. Tordek
has a quick tem per and blames the elves of the
Cloakwood for his family's misfortune. At a tavern. an
obnoxious elf minstrel sits at Tordek's table and tries to
strike up a conversation with the dwarf.
Chris says, "Tordek spits on the fioor, growls an
insult at the bard, and stomps over to the bar. He sits
on a stool and glares at the minstrei before ordering
another drink."
In this example, Chris has conveyed Tordek's mood
and given the DM a clear idca of his character's
altitude and actions.

PAR r:.:

<\DVL

Tl;RI NG

185

When using descriptive roleplaying, keep the
following things in mind:
Describe your character's emotions and altitude.
Focus on your character's intent and how others
might perceive it.
Provide as much embellishment as you feel
comfortable with.
Don't worry about getting things exactly right.Just
focus on thinking about what your character would do
and describing what you see in your mind.
ACTIVE ApPROACH TO ROLEPLAYING

If descriptive roleplaying teUs your DM and your fellow
players what your character thinks and does, active
roleplaying shows them.
When you use active roleplaying, you speak with your
character's voice, like an actor taking on a role. Vou might
even echo your character's movements and body language.
This approach is more immersive than descriptive
roleplaying, though you still need to describe things
that can't be reasonably acted out.
Going back to the example of Chris roleplaying Tordek
above, here's how the scene might play out if Chris used
active roleplaying:
Speaking as Tordek, Chris says in a gruff, deep voice,
"I was wondering why it suddenly smelled awful in here.
If I wanted to hear anything out of you, l'd snap your
arm and enjoy your screams." In his normal voice, Chris
then adds, "I get up, glare at the elf, and head to the bar."
RESULTS OF ROLEPLAYING

The DM uses your character's actions and attitudes to
determine how an NPC reacts. A cowardly NPC buckles
under threats of violence. A stubborn dwarf refuses to
let anyone badger her. A vain dragon laps up f1attery.
When interacting with an NPC, pay close attention to
the DM's portrayal of the NPC's mood, dialogue, and
personality. Vou might be able to determine an NPC's
personality traits, ideais, f1aws, and bonds, then play on
them to influence the NPC's attitude.
Interactions in 0&0 are much like interactions in
reallife. Ifyou can offer NPCs something they want,
threaten them with something they fear, or play on their
sympathies and goals, you can use words to get almost
anything you want. On the other hand, if you insult a
proud warrior or speak ill of a noble's allies, your efforts
to convince or deceive will fali short.

ABILITY CHECKS
In addition to roleplaying, ability checks are key in
determining the outcome of an interaction.
Your roleplaying efforts can alter an NPC's altitude,
but there might still be an element of chance in the
situation. For example, your DM can call for a Charisma
check at any point during an interaction if he or she
wants the dice to play a role in determining an NPC's
reactions. Other checks might be appropriate in certain
situations, at your DM's discretion.
Pay attention to your skill proficiencies when thinking
of how you want to interact with an NPC, and stack
the deck in your favor by using an approach that relies

186

PART 2 I ADVENTURING

on your best bonuses and skills. If the group needs to
trick a guard into letting them into a castle, the rogue
who is proficient in Deception is the best bet to lead the
discussion. When negotiating for a hostage's release,
the cleric with Persuasion should do most of the talking.

RESTING
Heroic though they might be, adventurers can't spend
every hour of the day in the thick of exploration, social
interaction, and combato They need rest-time to
sleep and eat, tend their wounds, refresh their minds
and spirits for spellcasting, and brace themselves for
further adventure.
Adventurers can take short rests in the midst of an
adventuring day and a long rest to end the day.

SHORT REST
A short rest is a period of downtime, at least I hour long,
during which a character does nothing more strenuous
than eating, drinking, reading, and tending to wounds.
A character can spend one or more Hit Dice at the end
of a short rest, up to the character's maximum number
of Hit Dice, which is equal to the character's leveI. For
each Hit Die spent in this way, the player rolls the die
and adds the character's Constitution modifier to it. The
character regains hit points equal to the total. The player
can decide to spend an additional Hit Die after each roll.
A character regains some spent Hit Dice upon finishing
a long rest, as explained below.

LONG REST
A long rest is a period of extended downtime, at least 8
hours long, during which a character sleeps or performs
light activity: reading, talking, eating, or standing watch
for no more than 2 hours. If the rest is interrupted by a
period of strenuous activity-at least 1 hour of walking,
fighting, casting spells, or similar adventuring activitythe characters must begin the rest again to gain any
benefit from it.
At the end of a long rest, a character regains alllost
hit points. The character also regains spent Hit Dice, up
to a number of dice equal to half of the character's total
number of them. For example, if a character has eight
Hit Dice, he or she can regain four spent Hit Dice upon
finishing a long resto
A character can't benefit from more than one long rest
in a 24-hour period, and a character must have at least
1 hit point at the start of the rest to gain its benefits.

BETWEEN AnVENTURES
Between trips to dungeons and battles against ancient
evils, adventurers need time to rest, recuperate, and
prepare for their next adventure. Many adventurers also
use this time to perform other tasks, such as crafting
arms and armor, performing research, or spending
their hard-earned gold.
In some cases, the passage of time is something that
occurs with little fanfare or description. When starting
a new adventure, the DM might simply declare that a
certain amount oftime has passed and allowyou to

describe in general terms what your character has
been doing. At other times, the DM might want to keep
track of just how much time is passing as events beyond
your perception stay in motion.

LIFESTYLE

EXPENSES

Between adventures, you choose a particular quality
of !ife and pay the cost of maintaining that lifestyle, as
described in chapter 5.
Living a particular lifestyle doesn't have a huge effect
on your character, but your lifestyle can affect the way
other individuais and groups react to you. For example,
when you lead an aristocratic lifestyle, it might be easier
for you to influence the nobles of the city than if you
live in poverty.

DOWNTIME

ACTIVITIES

Between adventures, the DM might ask you what your
character is doing during his or her downtime. Periods
of downtime can vary in duration, but each downtime
activity requires a certain number of days to complete
before you gain any benefit, and at least 8 hours of each
day must be spent on the downtime activity for the day
to count. The days do not need to be consecutive. Ir you
have more than the minimum amount of days to spend,
you can keep doing the same thing for a longer period
of time, or switch to a new downtime activity.
Downtime activities other than the ones presented
below are possible. If you want your character to spend
his or her downtime performing an activity not covered
here, discuss it with your DM.
CRAFTING

Vou can craft nonmagical objects, including adventuring
equipment and works of art. Vou must be proficient
with tools related to the object you are trying to create
(typically artisan's tools). Vou might also need aeeess to
special materiais or locations necessary to create it. For
example, someone proficient with smith's tools needs a
forge in order to craft a sword or suit of armor.
For every day of downtime you spend crafting, you
can craft one or more items with a total market value
not exceeding 5 gp, and you must expend raw materiaIs
worth half the total market value. Ir something you
want to craft has a market value greater than 5 gp, you
make progress every day in 5-gp increments until you
reach the market value of the item. For example, a suit
of plate armor (market value 1,500 gp) takes 300 days
to craft by yourself.
Multiple characters can combine their efforts toward
the crafting of a single item, provided that the characters
ali have proficiency with the requisite tools and are
working together in the same place. Each character
contributes 5 gp worth of effort for every day spent
helping to craft the item. For example, three characters
with the requisite to 01 proficiency and the proper
facilities can craft a suit of plate armor in 100 days,
at a total cost of 750 gp.
While crafting. you can maintain a modest !ifestyle
without having to pay 1 gp per day. or a comfortable
lifestyle at half the normal cost (see chapter 5 for more
information on lifestyle expenses).

PRACTICING

A PROFESSION

Vou can work between adventures. allowing you to
maintain a modest lifestyle without having to pay 1 gp
per day (see chapter 5 for more information on lifestyle
expenses). This benefit lasts as long you continue to
practice your profession.
Ir you are a member of an organization that can
provide gainful employment, such as a tem pIe or a
thieves' guild. you earo enough to support a comfortable
lifestyle instead.
Ir you have proficiency in the Performance skill and
put your performance skill to use during your downtime,
you earn enough to support a wealthy !ifestyle instead.
RECUPERATING

Vou can use downtime between adventures to recover
from a debilitating injury, disease, or poison.
After three days of downtime spent recuperating,
you can make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw.
On a successful save, you can choose one of the
following results:
End one effect on you that prevents you from regaining hit points.
For the next 24 hours, gain advantage on saving
throws against one disease or poison currently
affecting YOU.
RESEARCHING

The time between adventures is a great chance to
perform research, gaining insight into mysteries
that have unfurled over the course of the campaign.
Research can include poring over dusty tomes and
crumbling scrolls in a library or buying drinks for the
locais to pry rumors and gossip from their lips.
When you begin your research, the DM determines
whether the information is available, how many days of
downtime it will take to find it, and whether there are
any restrictions on your research (such as needing to
seek out a specific individual, tome. or location). The
DM might also require you to make one or more ability
checks. such as an Intelligence (Investigation) check
to find clues pointing toward the information you seek.
or a Charisma (Persuasion) check to secure someone's
aid. Once those conditions are met, you learn the
information if it is available.
For each day of research. you must spend 1 gp to
cover your expenses. This cost is in addition to your
normallifestyle expenses (as discussed in chapter 5).
TRAINING

Vou can spend time between adventures learning a new
language or training with a set of tooIs. Your DM might
allow additional training options.
First, you must find an instructor willing to teach you.
The DM determines how long it takes. and whether one
or more ability checks are required.
The training lasts for 250 days and eosts 1 gp per day.
After you spend the requisite amount of time and money,
you learn the new language or gain proficieney with
the new tool.

PART 2 I '\OVENTURI. 'G

CHAPTER

9: COMBAT

HE CLATTER OF A SWORD STRIKING AGAINST

a shield. The terrible rending sound as
monstrous claws tear through armor. A
brilliant flash of light as a ball of f1ame
blossoms from a wizard's spell. The sharp
tang of blood in the air, cutting through
the stench of vile monsters. Roars of fury,
shouts of triumph, cries of pain. Combat in 0&0 can be
chaotic, deadly, and thrilling.
This chapter provides the rules you need for your
characters and monsters to engage in combat, whether
it is a brief skirmish or an extended conflict in a
dungeon or on a field of battle. Throughout this chapter,
the rules address you, the player or Dungeon Master.
The Dungeon Master controls ali the monsters and
nonplayer characters involved in combat, and each other
player controls an adventurer. "You" can also mean the
character or monster that you control.

THE ORDER OF COMBAT
A typical combat encounter is a clash between two
sides, a f1urry of weapon swings, feints, parries,
footwork, and spellcasting. The game organizes the
chaos of combat into a cycle of rounds and turns. A
round represents about 6 seconds in the game world.
During a round, each participant in a battle takes a
turno The order of turns is determined at the beginning
of a combat encounter, when everyone rolls initiative.
Once everyone has taken a turn, the fight continues to
the next round if neither side has defeated the other.

A band of adventurers sneaks up on a bandit camp,
springing from the trees to attack them. A gelatinous
cube glides down a dungeon passage, unnoticed by
the adventurers until the cube engulfs one of them. In
these situations, one side of the battle gains surprise
over the other.
The DM determines who might be surprised. If
neither side tries to be stealthy, they automatically notice
each other. Otherwise, the DM compares the Dexterity
(Stealth) checks of anyone hiding with the passive
Wisdom (Perception) score of each creature on the

••

COMBAT

STEP

INITIATIVE
Initiative determines the order of turns during combat.
When combat starts, every participant makes a
Dexterity check lOdetermine their place in the initiative
order. The DM makes one roll for an entire group of
identical creatures, so each member of the group acts at
the same time.
The DM ranks the combatants in order from the one
with the highest Dexterity check total to the one with
the lowest. This is the order (called the initiative order)
in which they act during each round. The initiative order
remains the same from round to round.
If a tie occurs, the DM decides the order among
tied DM-controlled creatures, and the players decide
the order among their tied characters. The DM can
decide the order if the tie is between a monster and a
player character. Optionally, the DM can have the tied
characters and monsters each roll a d20 to determine
the order, highest roll going first.

YOUR TURN

SURPRISE

•••

opposing side. Any character or monster that doesn't
notice a threat is surprised at the start of the encounter.
If you're surprised, you can't move or take an aclion
on your first turn of the combat, and you can't take a
reaction until that turn ends. A member of a group can
be surprised even if the other members aren't.

BY STEP

1.Delermine surprise. The DMdelermines whelher anyone
involvedin lhe combal encounler is surprised.
2.Eslablish posilions. The DMdecides where ali lhe
characlers and monslers are localed. Givenlhe
advenlurers' marching arder ar lheir slaled posilions in
lhe roam ar olher localion, lhe DMfigures oul where lhe
adversaries are-how far awayand in whal direclion.
3.RolIinilialive.Everyoneinvolvedin lhe combal encounler
rolls inilialive,delermining lhe arder of combalanls' lurns.
4.Takelurns. Each parlicipanl in lhe ballle lakes a lum in
initiative arder.

5.Beginlhe nexl round. When everyoneinvolvedin lhe
combal has had a lurn, lhe round ends. Repealslep 4 unlil
lhe fighlingslops .

On your turn, you can move a distance up to your speed
and take one aetion. Vou decide whether to move first
or take your action first. Your speed-sometimes
ealled
your walking speed-is noted on your eharacter sheet.
The most common actions you can take are described
in the "Actions in Combat" section later in this chapter.
Many class features and other abilities provide
additional options for your action.
The "Movement and Position" section later in this
chapter gives the ru les for your move.
Vou can forgo moving, taking an action, or doing
anything at ali on your turn.lfyou can't decide what to
do on your turn, consider taking the Dodge or Ready
action, as described in "Actions in Combat."
BONUS ACTIONS

Various class features, spells, and other abilities let you
take an additional action on your turn called a bonus
action. The Cunning Action feature, for example, allows
a rogue to take a bonus action. Vou can take a bonus
action only when a special ability, spell, or other feature
of the game states that you can do something as a bonus
action. Vou otherwise don't have a bonus action to take.
Vou can take only one bonus action on your turn, so
you must choose which bonus action to use when you
have more than one available.
Vou choose when to take a bonus action during your
turn, unless the bonlls action's timing is specified, and
anything that deprives you ofyour ability to take actions
also prevents you from taking a bonus action.

....•
r----------------------~,.PART 2 I COMBAT

OTHER ACTI V ITY ON YOUR TuRN

Your turn can include a variety of f10urishes that require
neither your action nor your move.
Vou can communicate however you are abIe, through
brief utterances and gestures, as you take your turno
Vou can also interact with one object ar feature of the
enviranment for free, during either your move ar your
action. For example. you could open a doar during your
move as you stride toward a foe, ar you could draw your
weapon as part of the same action you use to attack.
If you want to interact with a second object, you need
to use your action. Some magic items and other special
objects always require an action to use, as stated
in their descriptions.
The DM might require you to use an action for any
of these activities when it needs special care ar when it
presents an unusual obstacle. For instance, the DM
could reasonably expect you to use an action to open a
stuck doar ar turn a crank to lower a drawbridge.

On your turn, you can move a distance up to your
speed. Vou can use as much ar as little of your speed as
you Iike on your turn, following the rules here.
Your movement can includejumping, c1imbing, and
swimming. These different modes of movement can
be combined with walking, ar they can constitute your
entire move. However you're moving, you deduct the
distance of each part of your move fram your speed until
it is used up ar until you are dane moving.
The "Special Types of Movement" section in
chapter 8 gives the particulars for jumping, c1imbing,
and swimming.

BREAKING

Vou can break up your movement on your turn, using
some of your speed before and after your action. For
example, if you have a speed of 30 feet, you can move
10 feet, take your action, and then move 20 feel.
MOVING

REACTIONS
Certain special abilities, spells, and situations allow
you to take a special action called a reaction. A reaction
is an instant response to a trigger of some kind, which
can occur on your turn ar on someone else's. The
opportunity attack, described later in this chapter, is the
most common type of reaction.
When you take a reaction, you can't take another one
until the start of your next turno If the reaction interrupts
another creature's turn, that creature can continue its
turn right after the reaction.

MOVEMENT AND POSITION
In combato characters and monsters are in constant
motion, often using movement and position to gain
the upper hand.

•••

INTERACTlNG

WITH OBIECTS

AROUND

Vou

••

Here are a few examples of the sorts of thing you can do in
tandem with your movement and action:

••
19°

Dp YOUR MOVE

BETWEEN ATTACKS

If you take an action that includes more than one
weapon attack, you can break up your movement even
further by moving between those attacks. For example,
a fighter who can make two attacks with the Extra
Attack feature and who has a speed of 25 feet could
move 10 feet, make an attack, move 15 feet, and then
attack again.
USING DIFFERENT

SPEEDS

If you have more than one speed, such as your walking
speed and a f1yingspeed, you can switch back and forth
between your speeds during your move. Whenever you
switch, subtract the distance you've already moved fram
the new speed. The result determines how much farther
you can move. If the result is O ar less. you can't use the
new speed during the current move.
For example, if you have a speed of 30 and a flying
speed of 60 beca use a wizard cast the fly spell on you,
you could fly 20 feet, then walk 10 feet, and then leap
into the air to fly 30 feet more.

DIFFICULT

TERRAIN

draw or sheathe a sword
open or close a door
withdrawa potion fram your backpack
pick up a dropped axe
take a bauble from a table
remove a ring fram your finger
stuff some food into your mouth
plant a banner in the ground
fish a few coins from your belt pouch
drink ali the ale in a lIagon
throwa lever or a switch
pull a torch fram a sconce
take a book from a shelf you can reach
extinguish a small liame

Combat rarely takes place in bare rooms or on
featureless plains. Boulder-strewn caverns, briarchoked forests, treacherous staircases-the
setting of
a typical fight contains difficult terrain.
Every foot of movement in difficult terrain costs 1
extra fool. This ruIe is true even if multiple things in
a space count as difficult terrain.
Low furniture, rubble, undergrawth, steep stairs,
snow, and shallow bogs are examples of difficult terrain.
The space of another creature, whether hostile or not,
also counts as difficult terrain.

don a mask

BEING PRONE

pull the hood of your c10ak up and over your head
put your ear to a door
kick a small stone
tum a key in a lock
tap the lIoor with a 10.foot pole
hand an item to another character

PART 2 I COMBAT

,.

Combatants often find themselves Iying on the ground,
either because they are knocked down ar because they
thraw themselves down. In the game, they are prane,
a condition described in appendix A.
Vou can drop prone without using any of your
speed. Standing up takes more effort; doing so costs

an amount of movement equal to half your speed. For •.•
example, if your speed is 30 feet, you must spend 15 feet
of movement to stand up. Vou can't stand up if you don't
have enough movement left or if your speed is O.
To move while prone, you must crawl or use magic
such as teleportation. Every foot of movement while
crawling costs 1 extra fool. Crawling 1 foot in difficult
terrain, therefore, costs 3 feet of movement.

MOVING AROUND
CREATURES

OTHER

Vou can move through a nonhostile creature's space.
In contrast, you can move through a hostile creature's
space only if the creature is at least two sizes larger or
smaller than you. Remember that another creature's
space is difficult terrain for you.
Whether a creature is a friend or an enemy, you can't
willingly end your move in its space.
lfyou leave a hostil e creature's reach during your
move, you provoke an opportunity attack, as explained
later in the chapter.

FLYING MOVEMENT
Flying creatures enjoy many benetits of mobility, but
they must also deal with the danger of falling. lf a flying
creature is knocked prone, has its speed reduced to à, or
is otherwise deprived of the ability to move, the creature
falls, unless it has the ability to hover or it is being held
aloft by magic, such as by the fly spell.

CREATURE

SIZE

Each creature takes up a different amount of space.
The Size Categories table shows how much space
a creature of a particular size controls in combal.
Objects sometimes use the same size categories.
SIZE

CATEGORIES

Size

Space

Tiny

2'/2 by 2'1, fI.
5 by Sfl.

Small
Medium
Large
Huge
Gargantuan

SbySft.
10 by 10 ft.
lSbylSft.
20 by 20 ft. or larger

SPACE
A creature's space is the area in feet that it effectively
controls in combat, not an expression of its physical
dimensions. A typical Medium creature isn't 5 feet
wide, for example, but it does control a space that
wide. lf a Medium hobgoblin stands in a 5-foot-wide
doorway, other creatures can't get through unless the
hobgoblin lets them.
A creature's space also reflects the area it needs to
tight effeetively. For that reason, there's a limit to lhe
number of ereatures that can surround another creature
in combal. Assuming Medium combatants, eight
creatures can tit in a 5-foot radius around another one.
Because larger creatures take up more space, fewer
of them can surround a creature. If tive Large creatures

4

•

VARIANT:

PLAYING

CAST A SPELL

ON A CRIO

If you play oul a combat using a square grid and minialures
ar olher lokens, follow lhese rules.
Squares. Each square on lhe grid represents 5 feel.
Speed. Ralher lhan moving fool by fool, move square by
square on lhe grid. This means you use your speed in 5.foot
segments. This is particularly easy if you lranslate your speed
inlo squares by dividing the speed by 5. For example, a speed
of 30 feel lranslales inlo a speed of 6 squares.
If you use a grid often, consider wriling your speed in
squares on your characler sheel.
Enlering a Square. To enler a square, you musl have
ai leasl 1 square of movement left, even if lhe square is
diagonally adjacenl lo lhe square you're in. (The rule for
diagonal movemenl sacrifices realism for lhe sake of smoolh
play. The Dungeon Mas!er's Cuide provides guidance on using
a more realislic approach.)
If a square cosls exlra movemenl, as a square of diflicult
lerrain does, you musl have enough movemenl lefl lo pay for
enlering it. For example, you musl have ai leasl 2 squares of
movemenl lefl lo enler a square of diflicull lerrain.
Corners. Diagonal movemenl can'l cross lhe comer of a
wall, large lree, ar olher lerrain fealure lhal fills its space.
Ranges. To delermine the range on a grid belween two
lhings-whelher
crealures ar objecls-start
counling squares
from a square adjacent lo one of lhem and slop counling in
lhe space of the olher one. Counl by lhe shortesl raule.

~

~

crowd around a Medium or smaller one, there's little
room for anyone else. In contrast, as many as twenty
Medium creatures can surround a Gargantuan one.
SQUEEZING

INTO A SMALLER SPACE

A crealure can squeeze lhrough a space that is large
enough for a creature one size smaller than il. Thus, a
Large creature can squeeze through a passage that's
only 5 feet wide. While squeezing through a space,
a creature must spend 1 extra foot for every foot it
moves there, and it has disadvantage on attack rolls
and Dexlerily saving throws. Attack rolls against the
creature have advantage while it's in the smaller space.

ACTIONS IN COMBAT
When you take your action on your turn, you can take
one of the actions presented here, an action you gained
from your class or a special feature, or an action that
you improvise. Many monsters have action options of
their own in their stat blocks.
When you describe an action not detailed elsewhere
in the roles, the DM tells you whether that action is
possible and what kind of roll you need to make, if any,
to determine success or failure.

ATTACK
The most common action to take in combat is the Attack
action, whether you are swinging a sword, Iiring an
arrow fram a bow, or brawling with your fists.
With this action, you make one melee or ranged
attack. See the "Making an Attack" section for the rules
that govern attacks.
Certa in features, such as the Extra Attack feature
of the Iighter, allow you to make more than one attack
with this action.

PART 2

I COMBAT

Spellcasters such as wizards and clerics, as well as
many monsters, have access to spells and can use
them to great effect in combal. Each spell has a casting
time, which specilies whether the caster must use an
action, a reaction, minutes, or even hours to cast the
spell. Casting a spell is, therefore, not necessarily an
action. Most spells do have a casting time of 1 action,
so a spellcaster often uses his or her action in combat
to cast such a spell. See chapter 10 for the rules
on spellcasting.

DASH
When you take the Dash action, you gain extra
movement for the current turn. The increase equals
your speed, after applying any modiliers. With a speed
of 30 feet, for example, you can move up to 60 feet on your
turn if you dash.
Any increase or decrease to your speed changes this
additional movement by the same amounl. lf your speed
of 30 feet is reduced to 15 feet, for instance, you can
move up to 30 feel this turn if you dash.

DISENGAGE
lfyou take the Disengage action, your movement doesn't
provoke opportunity attacks for the rest of the turn.

DODGE
When you take the Dodge action, you focus entirely on
avoiding attacks. Until the start of your next turn, any
attack roll made againsl you has disadvantage if you
can see the attacker, and you make Dexterity saving
throws with advantage. Vou lose this benelit if you are
incapacitated (as explained in appendix A) or if your
speed drops to O.

HELP
Vou can lend your aid to another creature in the
completion of a task. When you take the Help action,
the creature you aid gains advantage on the next ability
check it makes to perform the task you are helping with,
provided that it makes the check before the start of
your next turno
Alternatively, you can aid a friendly creature in
attacking a creature within 5 feet of you. Vou feint,
distract the target, or in some other way team up to
make your ally's attack more effective. lf your ally
attacks the target before your next turn, the Iirst attack
roll is made with advantage.

HIDE
When you take the Hide action, you make a Dexterity
(Stealth) check in an attempt to hide, following the rules
in chapter 7 for hiding. lfyou succeed, you gain certain
benelits, as described in the "Unseen Attackers and
Targets" section later in this chapter.

4
IMPROVISING

,
AN ACTION

Your character can do things not covered by the actions in
this chapter, such as breaking down doors, intimidating
enemies, sensing weaknesses in magical defenses, or calling
for a parley with a foe. The only limits to the actions you can
attempt are your imagination and your character's ability
scores. See the descriptions of the ability scores in chapter 7
for inspiration as you improvise.

When you describe an action not detailed elsewhere in
the rules, the DM tells you whether that action is possible
and what kind of roll you need to make, if any, to determine
success ar failure.

~

r

READY
Sometimes you want to get the jump on a foe or wait for
a particular circumstance before you act. To do so, you
can take lhe Ready action on your turn so that you can
act later in the round using your reaction.
First, you decide what perceivable circumstance
will trigger your reaction. Then, you choose lhe action
you will take in response to that trigger, or you choose
to move up to your speed in response to it. Examples
include "lf lhe cultist steps on the trapdoor, 1'11pull the
lever that opens it," and "If the goblin steps next to me,
I move away."
When the lrigger occurs, you can either take your
reaction right after the trigger finishes or ignore
the trigger. Remember that you can take only one
reaction per round.
When you ready a spell, you cast it as normal but
hold its energy, which you release with your reaction
when the trigger occurs. To be readied, a spell must'
have a casting time of 1 action, and holding onto the
spell's magic requires concenlration (explained in
chapter 10). If your concentration is broken, the spell
dissipates without taking effect. For example, if you are
concentrating on the web spell and ready magic missiJe,
your web spell ends, and if you take damage before
you release magie missiJe with your reaction, your
concentration might be broken.

SEARCH
When you take the Search action, you devote your
attention to finding something. Depending on the
nature of your search, the DM might have you make
a Wisdom (Perception) check or an lntelligence
(Investigation) check.

USE AN OBJECT
Vou normally interact with an object while doing
something else, such as when you draw a sword as part
of an attack. When an object requires your action for
its use, you take the Use an Object action. This action
is also useful when you want to interact with more than
one object on your turno

MAKING AN ATTACK
Whether you're striking with a melee weapon, firing a
weapon aI range, or making an attack roll as part of a
spell, an attack has a simple structure.

1. Choose a target. Pick a target within your attack's
range: a creature, an object, ar a location.
2. Determine modifiers. The DM determines whether
the target has cover and whether you have advantage
ar disadvantage against the target. In addition, spel1s,
special abilities. and other effects can apply penalties
ar bonuses to your attack rol1.
3. Resolve the attack. Vou make the attack roll. On a
hit, you rol1damage, unless the particular attack has
rules that specify otherwise. Some attacks cause
special effects in addition to ar instead of damage.
If there's ever any question whether something you're
doing counts as an attack, the rule is simple: if you're
making an attack rol1,you're making an attack.

ATTACK ROLLS
When you make an attack, your attack roll determines
whether the attack hits ar misses. To make an attack
rol1,rol1a d20 and add the appropriate modifiers. lf the
total of the roll plus modifiers equals ar exceeds the
target's Armar Class (AC),the attack hits. The AC of a
character is determined at character creation. whereas
the AC of a monster is in its stat block.
MODIFIERS TO THE ROLL

When a character makes an attack rol1,the two most
common modifiers to the rol1are an ability modifier
and the character's proficiency bonus. When a monster
makes an attack roll, it uses whatever modifier is
provided in its stat block.
Ability Modifier. The ability modifier used for a melee
weapon attack is Strength, and the ability modifier used
for a ranged weapon attack is Dexterity. Weapons that
have the finesse ar thrown property break this rule.
Some spel1s also require an attack roll. The ability
modifier used for a spel1 attack depends on the
spellcasting ability of the spel1caster, as explained
in chapter 10.
Proficiency Bonus. Vou add your proficiency bonus
to your attack rol1when you attack using a weapon with
which you have proficiency, as well as when you attack
with a spell.
ROLLING

I OR 20

Sometimes fate blesses ar curses a combatant, causing
the novice to hit and the veteran to miss.
If the d20 rol1for an attack is a 20, the attack hits
regardless of any modifiers ar the target's AC. In
addition, the attack is a criticai hit, as explained later
in this chapter.
If the d20 roll for an attack is a I, the attack misses
regardless of any modifiers ar the target's AC.

UNSEEN ATTACKERS AND TARGETS
Combatants often try to escape their foes' notice
by hiding, casting the invisibility spel1, ar lurking
in darkness.
When you attack a target that you can't see, you have
disadvantage on the attack roll. This is true whether
you're guessing the target's location ar you're targeting
a creature you can hear but not see. If the target isn't in

4
the location you targeted, you automatically miss, but
the DM typically just says that the attack missed, not
whether you guessed the target's location correctly.
When a creature can't see you, you have advantage on
attack rolls against il.
lf you are hidden-both unseen and unheard-when
you make an attack, you give away your location when
the attack hits or misses.

RANGED ATTACKS
When you make a ranged attack, you fire a bow or a
crossbow, huri a handaxe, or otherwise send projectiles
to strike a foe at a distance. A monster might shoot
spines from its taii. Many spells also involve making a
ranged atlack.
RANGE

Vou can make ranged attacks only against targets within
a specified range.
If a ranged attack, such as one made with a spell, has a
single range, you can't attack a target beyond this range.
Some ranged attacks, such as those made with a
longbow or a shortbow, have two ranges. The smaller
number is the normal range, and the larger number is
the long range. Your attack roll has disadvantage when
your target is beyond normal range, and you can't attack
a target beyond the long range.

CONTESTS

,
IN COMBAT

Sattle often involves pítting your prowess against that of
your foe. Such a challenge is represented by a contes!. This
section includes the most common contests that require an
actíon in combat: grappling and shoving a creature. The DM
can use these contests as models for improvising others.

~

~

creature. The atlack interrupts the provoking creature's
movement, occurring right before the creature
leaves your reach.
Vou can avoid provoking an opportunity attack by
taking the Disengage action. Vou also don't provoke an
opportunity attack when you teleport or when someone
or something moves you without using your movement,
action, or reaction. For example, you don't provoke an
opportunity atlack if an explosion huris you out of a foe's
reach or if gravity causes you to fall past an enemy.
TWO-WEAPON

FIGHTING

When you take the Attack action and attack with a light
melee weapon that you're holding in one hand, you can
use a bonus action to atlack with a different light melee
weapon that you're holding in the other hand. Vou don't
add your ability modifier to the damage of the bonus
atlack, unless that modifier is negative.
If either weapon has the thrown property, you
can throw the weapon, instead of making a melee
atlack with il.

RANGED ATTACKS IN CLOSE COMBAT

Aiming a ranged attack is more difficult when a foe
is next to you. When you make a ranged atlack with
a weapon, a spell, or some other means, you have
disadvantage on the attack roll if you are within 5 feet
of a hostil e creature who can see you and who isn't
incapacitated.

MELEE ATTACKS
Used in hand-to-hand combat, a meIee atlack allows
you to attack a foe within your reach. A melee attack
typically uses a handheld weapon such as a sword,
a warhammer, or an axe. A typical monster makes a
melee attack when it strikes with its daws, horns, teeth,
tentades, or other body parI. A few spells also involve
making a mele e atlack.
Most creatures have a 5-foot reach and can thus
attack targets within 5 feet of them when making a
melee attack. Certain creatures (typically those larger
than Medium) have melee attacks with a greater reach
than 5 feet, as noted in their descriptions.
When you are unarmed, you can fight in melee by
making an unarmed strike, as shown in the weapon
table in chapter 5.
OPPORTUNITY

ATTACKS

In a fight, everyone is constantly watching for enemies
to drop their guardo Vou can rarely move heedlessly past
your foes without putting yourself in danger; doing so
provokes an opportunity attack.
Vou can make an opportunity attack when a hostile
creature that you can see moves out of your reach. To
make the opportunity attack, you use your reaction
to make one melee atlack against the provoking

GRAPPLING

When you want to grab a creature or wrestle with it,
you can use the Attack action to make a special melee
attack, a grapple. If you're able to make multiple attacks
with the Atlack action, this atlack replaces one of them.
The target of your grapple must be no more than one
size larger than you, and it must be within your reach.
Using at least one free hand, you try to seize the target
by making a grapple check, a Strength (Athletics)
check contested by the target's Strength (Athletics) or
Dexterity (Acrobatics) check (the target chooses the
ability to use). If you succeed, you subject the target to
the grappled condition (see appendix A). The condition
specifies the things that end it, and you can release the
target whenever you like (no action required).
Escaping a Grapple. A grappled creature can use its
action to escape. To do so, it must succeed on a Strength
(Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check contested by
your Strength (Athletics) check.
Moving a Grappled Creature. When you move, you
can drag or carry the grappled creature with you, but
your speed is halved, unless the creature is two or more
sizes smaller than you.
SHOVING A CREATURE

Using the Attack action, you can make a special melee
atlack to shove a creature, either to knock it prone or
push it away from you. Ifyou're able to make multiple
atlacks with the Attack action, this atlack replaces
one ofthem.
The target of your shove must bc no more than one
size larger than you, and it must be within your reach.
Vou make a Strength (Athletics) check contested by the
target's Strength (Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics)
PART 2 1 COMBA

r

195

check (the target chooses the ability to use). If you win
the contest, you either knock the target prone or push
it 5 feet away from you.

COVER
Walls, trees, creatures, and other obstacles can provide
cover during combat, making a target more difficult
to harm. A target can benetit from cover only when an
attack or other effect originates on the opposite side
of the cover.
There are three degrees of cover. If a target is behind
multi pIe sources of cover, only the most protective
degree of cover applies; the degrees aren't added
together. For example, if a target is behind a creature
that gives half cover and a tree trunk that gives threequarters cover, the target has three-quarters cover.
A target with half cover has a +2 bonus to AC and
Oexterity saving throws. A target has half cover if an
obstacle blocks at least half of its body. The obstacle
might be a low wall. a large piece of furniture, a narrow
tree trunk, or a creature, whether that creature is an
enemy or a friend.
A target with three-quarters
cover has a +5 bonus
to AC and Oexterity saving throws. A target has threequarters cover if about three-quarters of it is covered
by an obstacle. The obstacle might be a portcullis. an
arrow slit, or a thick tree trunk.
A target with total cover can't be targeted directly
by an attack or a spell, although some spells can reach
such a target by including it in an area of effect. A
target has total cover if it is completely concealed by
an obstacle.

DAMAGE AND HEALING
Injury and the risk of death are constant companions
of those who explore the worlds of 0&0. The thrust of
a sword. a well-placed arrow, or a blast of f1ame from a
firebaJl spell ali have the potential to damage. or even
kill. the hardiest of creatures.

HIT POINTS
Hit points represent a combination of physical and
mental durability. the will to live, and luck. Creatures
with more hit points are more difficult to kill. Those
with fewer hit points are more fragile.
A creature's current hit points (usually just called hit
points) can be any number from the creature's hit point
maximum down to O. This number changes frequently
as a creature takes damage ar receives healing.
Whenever a creature takes damage, that damage is
subtracted from its hit points. The loss of hit points has
no effect on a creature's capabilities until the creature
drops to O hit points.

DAMAGE ROLLS
Each weapon. spell. and harmful monster ability
specifies the damage it deals. Vou roll the damage die
or dice, add any modifiers, and apply the damage to
your target. Magic weapons, special abilities, and other
factors can grant a bonus to damage.

PART 2 I COMBAT

When attacking with a weapon. you add your ability
modifier-the same modifier used for the attack rollto the damage. A spell tells you which dice to roll for
damage and whether to add any modifiers.
If a spell ar other effect deals damage to more than
one target at the same time, roll the damage once for
ali of them. For example, when a wizard casts firebaJl or
a cleric casts liame strike, the spell's damage is rolled
once for ali creatures caught in the blast.
CRITICAL

HITS

When you score a criticai hit, you get to roll extra dice
for the attack's damage against the target. RolI ali of the
attack's damage dice twice and add them together. Then
add any relevant modifiers as normal. To speed up play.
you can roll ali the damage dice alonce.
For example, if you score a criticai hit with a dagger,
roll 2d4 for the damage, rather than Id4, and then add
your relevant ability modifier. If the attack involves other
damage dice, such as from the rogue's Sneak Attack
feature, you roll those dice twice as well.
DAMAGE TYPES

Oifferent attacks. damaging spells, and other harmful
effects deal different types of damage. Oamage types
have no rules of their own, but other rules, such as
damage resistance, rely on the types.
The damage types follow, with examples to help a
DM assign a damage type to a new effect.
Acid. The corrosive spray of a black dragon's breath
and the dissolving enzymes secreted by a black pudding
deal acid damage.
Bludgeoning. Slunt force attacks-hammers.
falling,
constriction. and the like-deal bludgeoning damage.
Cold. The infernal chill radiating from an ice devil's
spear and the frigid blast of a white dragon's breath
deal cold damage.
Fire. Red dragons breathe fire, and many spells
conjure f1ames to deal fire damage,
Force. Force is pure magical energy focused into a
damaging formo Most effects that deal force damage are
spells, including magic missile and spirituaJ weapon.
Lightning. A Jightning bolt spell and a blue dragon's
breath deallightning damage.
Necrotic. Necrotic damage. dealt by certain undead
and a spell such as chilJ touch. withers matter and
even the soul.
Piercing. Puncturing and impaling attacks, including
spears and monsters' bites, deal piercing damage.
Poison. Venomous stings and the toxic gas of a green
dragon's breath deal poison damage.
Psychic. Mental abilities such as a mind f1ayer's
psionic blast deal psychic damage.
Radiant. Radiant damage. dealt bya cleric's liame
strike spell or an angel's smiting weapon, sears the f1esh
Iike fire and overloads the spirit with powcr.
Slashing. Swords. axes. and monsters' claws deal
slashing damage.
Thunder. A concussive burst of sound. such as the
effect of lhe thunderwave spell, deals lhunder damage.

DAMAGE RESISTANCE AND
VULNERABILITY
Some creatures and objects are exceedingly difficult or
unusually easy to hurt with certain types of damage.
lf a creature or an object has resistance to a damage
type, damage of that type is halved against it. If a
creature or an object has vulnerability to a damage
type, damage of that type is doubled against it.
Resistance and then vulnerability are applied after
ali other modifiers to damage. For example, a creature
has resistance to bludgeoning damage and is hit byan
altack that deals 25 bludgeoning damage. The creature
is also within a magical aura that reduces ali damage by
5. The 25 damage is first reduced by 5 and then halved,
so the creature takes 10 damage.
Multiple instances of resistance or vulnerability that
affect the same damage type count as only one instance.
For example, if a creature has resistance to fire damage
as well as resistance to ali nonmagical damage, the
damage of a nonmagical fire is reduced by half against
the creature, not reduced by three-quarters.

HEALING
Unless it results in death, damage isn't permanent. Even
death is reversible through powerful magic. Rest can
restore a creature's hit points (as explained in chapter
8), and magical methods such as a cure wOllnds spell or
a potion of healing can remove damage in an instant.
When a creature receives healing of any kind, hit
points regained are added to its current hit points. A
creature's hit points can't exceed its hit point maximum,
so any hit points regained in excess of this number are
lost. For example, a druid granls a ranger 8 hit points of
healing. If the ranger has 14 current hit points and has a
hit point maximum of 20, the ranger regains 6 hit points
from the druid, not 8.
A creature that has died can't regain hit points until
magic such as the revivify spell has restored it to life.

DROPPING TO O HIT POINTS
When you drop to O hit points, you either die outright or
fali unconscious, as explained in the following sections.
INSTANT

DEATH

Massive damage can kill you instantly. When damage
reduces you to O hit points and there is damage
remaining, you die if the remaining damage equals
or exceeds your hit point maximum.
For example, a cleric with a maximum of
12 hit points currently has 6 hit points. If she
takes 18 damage from an attack, she is reduced
to O hit points, but 12 damage remains. Because
the remaining damage equals her hit point
maximum, the cleric dies.
FALLING

UNCONSCIOUS

lf damage reduces you to O hit points and fails to kill
you, you fali unconscious (see appendix A). This
unconsciousness ends if you regain any hit points.

"'"

•••
DESCRIBING

THE

EFFECTS

OF DAMAGE

Dungeon Masters deseribe hit pointloss in different ways.
When your eurrent hit pointtotal is half or more of your hit
point maximum. you lypieally show no signs of injury. When
you drop below half your hit point maximum, you show signs
of wear, sueh as euts and bruises. An attaek that reduees you
to O hit points strikes you direetly, leaving a bleeding injury or
other trauma, or it simply knoeks you uneonseious.

~
DEATH

~
SAVING

THROWS

Whenever you start your tum with O hit points, you
must make a special saving throw, called a death saving
throw, to determine whether you creep closer to death
or hang onto life. Unlike other saving throws, this one
isn't tied to any ability score. Vou are in the hands of fate
now, aided only by spells and features that improve your
chances of succeeding on a saving throw.
Roll a d20. If lhe roll is 10 or higher, you succeed.
Otherwise, you fai!' A success or failure has no effect
by itself. On your third success. you become stable (see
below). On your third failure, you die. The successes
and failures don't need to be consecutive; keep track
of both until you collect three of a kind. The number of
both is reset to zero when you regain any hit points or
become stable.
Ro/ling 1 or 20. When you make a death saving throw
and roll a 1 on the d20, it counts as two failures. lf you
roll a 20 on the d20, you regain 1 hit point.
Damageat OHit Points. lfyou take any damage while
you have O hit points, you suffer a death saving throw
failure. If the damage is from a criticai hit, you suffcr
two failures instead. lf lhe damage equals or exceeds
your hit point maximum, you suffer instant death.
STABILIZING

A CREATURE

The best way to save a creature with O hit points is to
heal it. If healing is unavailable, the creature can at
least be stabilized so that it isn't killed by a failed death
saving throw.
Vou can use your action to administer first aid to an
unconscious creature and altempt to stabilize it, which
requires a successful De 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check.
A stab1e creature doesn't make death saving throws,
even though it has O hit points, but it does remain
unconscious. The creature stops being stable, and must

start making death saving throws again, if it takes any
damage. A stable creature that isn't healed regains
I hit point after Id4 hours.
MONSTERS AND DEATH

Most DMs have a monster die the instant it drops to
O hit points, rather than having it fali unconscious and
make death saving throws.
Mighty villains and special nonplayer characters
are common exceptions; the DM might have them
fali unconscious and follow the same rules as
player characters.

KNOCKING

A CREATURE OUT

Sometimes an attacker wants to incapacitate a foe,
rather than deal a killing blow. When an attacker
reduces a creature to Ohit points with a melee attack,
the attacker can knock the creature out. The attacker
can make this choice the instant the damage is dealt.
The creature falls unconscious and is stable.

TEMPORARY HIT POINTS
Some spells and special abilities confer temporary hit
points to a creature. Temporary hit points aren't actual
hit points: they are a buffer against damage, a pool of hit
points that protect you from injury.
When you have temporary hit points and take damage,
the temporary hit points are lost first, and any leftover
damage carries over to your normal hit points. For
example, if you have 5 temporary hit points and take
7 damage, you lose the temporary hit points and then
take 2 damage.
Because temporary hit points are separate from
your actual hit points, they can exceed your hit point
maximum. A character can, therefore, be at full hit
points and receive temporary hit points.
Healing can't restore temporary hit points, and they
can't be added together. If you have temporary hit points
and receive more of them, you decide whether to keep
the ones you have or to gain the new ones. For example,
if a spell grants you 12 temporary hit points when you
already have lO, you can have 12 or lO, not 22.
lf you have O hit points, receiving temporary hit points
doesn't restore you to consciousness or stabilize you.
They can still absorb damage directed at you while
you're in that state, but only true healing can save you.
Unless a feature that grants you temporary hit points
has a duration, they last until they're depleted or you
finish a long resto

MOUNTED

COMBAT

A knight charging into battle on a warhorse, a wizard
casting spells from the back of a griffon, or a c1eric
soaring through the sky on a pegasus ali enjoy the
benefits of speed and mobility that a mount can provide.
A willing creature that is at least one size larger than
you and that has an appropriate anatomy can serve as a
mount, using the following rules.

PART 2 I COMBAT

MOUNTING

AND DISMOUNTING

Once during your move, you can mount a creature that
is within 5 feet of you or dismount. Doing so costs an
amount of movement equal to half your speed. For
example, if your speed is 30 feet, you must spend 15
feet of movement to mount a horse. Therefore, you can't
mount it if you don't have 15 feet of movement left or
if your speed is O.
If an effect moves your mount against its will while
you're on it, you must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity
saving throw or fali off the mount, landing prone in a
space within 5 feet of it. If you're knocked prone while
mounted, you must make the same saving throw.
1fyour mount is knocked prone, you can use your
reaction to dismount it as it falls and land on your feet.
Otherwise, you are dismounted and fali prone in a
space within 5 feet it.

CONTROLLING

A MOUNT

While you're mounted, you have two options. Vou
can either control the mount or allow it to act
independently. Intelligent creatures, such as dragons,
act independently.
Vou can controI a mount only if it has been trained
to accept a rider. Domesticated horses, donkeys, and
similar creatures are assumed to have such training.
The initiative of a controlled mount changes to match
yours when you mount it. 1t moves as you direct it, and
it has only three action options; Dash, Disengage, and
Dodge. A controlled mount can move and act even on
the tu rn that you mount it.
An independent mount retains its place in the
initiative order. Bearing a rider puts no restrictions on
the actions the mount can take, and it moves and acts
as it wishes. 1t might flee from combat, rush to attack
and devour a badly injured foe, or otherwise act against
your wishes.
In either case, if the mount provokes an opportunity
attack while you're on it, the attacker can target you
or the mount.

UNDERWATER COMBAT
When adventurers pursue sahuagin back to their
undersea homes, fight off sharks in an ancient
shipwreck, or find themselves in a flooded dungeon
room, they must fight in a challenging environment.
Underwater the following rules apply.
When making a me1ee weapon attack, a creature
that doesn't have a swimming speed (either natural or
granted by magic) has disadvantage on the attack roll
unless the weapon is a dagger, javelin, shortsword,
spear, or trident.
A ranged weapon attack automatically misses
a target beyond the weapon's normal range. Even
against a target within normal range, the attack roll has
disadvantage unless the weapon is a crossbow, a net, or
a weapon that is thrown like a javelin (including a spear,
trident, or dart).
Creatures and objects that are fully immersed in
water have resistance to fire damage.

PARI 3
The Rules af Magic

.

PART

3 I Til E RULES

OF MAGIC

CHAPTER

10: SPELLCASTING

AGIC PERMEATES THE WORLDS OF D&D AND

most often appears in the form of a spell.
This chapter provides the rules for
casting spells. Different character
classes have distinctive ways of learning
and preparing their spells, and monsters
use spells in unique ways. Regardless of its source,
a spell follows the rules here.

WHAT 1s A SPELL?
A spell is a discrete magical effect, a single shaping
of the magical energies that suffuse the multiverse
into a specific, limited expression. In casting a spell,
a character carefully plucks at the invisible strands of
raw magic suffusing the world, pins them in place in a
particular pattern, sets them vibrating in a specific way,
and then releases them to unleash the desired effect-in
most cases, ali in the span of seconds.
Spells can be versatile tools, weapons, or protective
wards. They can deal damage or undo it, impose or
remove conditions (see appendix A), drain life energy
away, and restore life to the dead.
Uncounted thousands of spells have been created
over the course of the multiverse's history, and many of
them are long forgotten. Some might yet lie recorded in
crumbling spellbooks hidden in ancient ruins or trapped
in the minds of dead gods. Or they might someday be
reinvented by a character who has amassed enough
power and wisdom to do sO.

SPELL LEVEL
Every spell has a levei from O to 9. A spell's levei is a
general indicator of how powerful it is. with the lowly
(but still impressive) magic missile at 1st levei and
the earth-shaking wish at 9th. Cantrips-simple
but
powerful spells that characters can cast almost by roteare levei O. The higher a spell's levei, the higher levei a
spellcaster must be to use that spell.
Spelllevel and character levei don't correspond
directly. Typically, a character has to be at least 17th
levei, not 9th levei, to cast a 9th-leveI spell.

KNOWN AND PREPARED SPELLS
Before a spellcaster can use a spell, he or she must
have the spell firmly fixed in mind, or must have access
to the spell in a magic item. Members of a few classes,
including bards and sorcerers, have a limited list of
spells they know that are always fixed in mind. The
same thing is true of many magic-using monsters. Other
spellcasters, such as clerics and wizards, undergo a
process of preparing spells. This process varies for
different classes, as detailed in their descriptions.
4
CASTING

•
IN ARMOR

are wearing to cast a spell. Vou are otherwise too distracted

and physically hampered

SPELL SLOTS
Regardless of how many spells a caster knows or
prepares, he or she can cast only a limited number of
spells before resting. Manipulating the fabric of magic
and channeling its energy into even a simple spell is
physically and mentally taxing, and higher-Ievel spells
are even more so. Thus, each spellcasting class's
description (except that of the warlock) includes a table
showing how many spell slots of each spelllevel a
character can use at each character leveI. For example,
the 3rd-level wizard Umara has four 1st-levei spell slots
and two 2nd-levei slots.
When a character casts a spell, he or she expends
a slot of that spell's levei or higher, effectively "filling"
a slot with the spell. Vou can think of a spell slot as a
groove of a certain size-small for a 1st-levei slot,larger
for a spell of higher leveI. A 1st-levei spell fits into a slot
of any size, but a 9th-levei spell fits only in a 9th-levei
si 01. So when Umara casts magic missile, a 1st-levei
spell, she spends one of her four 1st-levei slots and has
three remaining.
Finishing a long rest restores any expended spell slots
(see chapter 8 for the rules on resting).
Some characters and monsters have special abilities
that let them cast spells without using spell slots. For
example, a monk who follows the Way of the Four
Elements, a warlock who chooses certain eldritch
invocations, and a pit fiend from the Nine Hells can ali
cast spells in such a way.
CASTlNG A SPELL AT A HIGHER LEVEL

When a spellcaster casts a spell using a slot that is of a
higher levei than the spell, the spell assumes the higher
levei for that casting. For instance, if Umara casts magic
missile using one of her 2nd-levei slots, that magic
missile is 2nd leveI. Effectively, the spell expands to fill
the slot it is put into.
Some spells, sue h as magic missile and cure wounds,
have more powerful effects when cast at a higher levei,
as detailed in a spell's description.

CANTRIPS
A cantrip is a spell that can be cast at will, without
using a spell slot and without being prepared in
advance. Repeated practice has fixed the spell in the
caster's mind and infused the caster with the magic
needed to produce the effect over and over. A cantrip's
spelllevel is O.

RITUALS
Certain spells have a special tag: ritual. Such a spell
ean be cast following the normal rules for spelleasting,
or the spell can be cast as a ritual. The ritual version of
a spell takes 10 minutes longer to cast than normal.

Because ofthe mental focus and precise gestures required
for spellcasting, you must be proncient with the armor you

~

In every case, the number of spells a caster can
have fixed in mind at any given time depends on the
character's leveI.

by your armor for spellcasting.

r
PART 3

SPELU ...\STI

"G
20

It also doesn't expend a spell slot, which means the
ritual version of a spell can't be cast at a higher leveI.
To cast a spell as a ritual, a spellcaster must have a
feature that grants the ability to do so. The cleric and the
druid, for example, have such a feature. The caster must
also have the spell prepared or on his or her list of spells
known, unless the character's ritual feature specifies
otherwise, as the wizard's does.

CASTING A SPELL
When a character casts any spell, the same basic rules
are followed, regardless of the character's class or the
spell's effects.
Each spell description in chapter li begins with a block
of information, including the spell's name, levei,school
of magic, casting time, range, components, and duration.
The rest of a spell entry describes the spell's effect.

CASTING TIME
Most spells require a single action to cast, but some
spells require a bonus action, a reaction, or much more
time to cast.
BONUS ACTION

A spell cast with a bonus action is especially swift. Vou
must use a bonus action on your turn to cast the spell,
provided that you haven't already taken a bonus action
this turno Vou can't cast another spell during the same
turn, except for a cantrip with a casting time of I action.
REACTIONS

Some spells can be cast as reactions. These spells
take a fraction of a second to bring about and are cast
in response to some event. If a spell can be cast as a
reaction, the spell description tells you exactly when
you can do sO.
LONGE R CASTING TIMES

Certain spells (including spells cast as rituais) require
more time to cast: minutes or even hours. When you
cast a spell with a casting time longer than a single
action or reaction, you must spend your action each
turn casting the spell, and you must maintain your
concentration while you do so (see "Concentration"
below). ]f your concentration is broken, the spell fails,
but you don't expend a spell slot. ]f you want to try
casting the spell again, you must start over.

RANGE
The target of a spell must be within the spell's range.
For a spelllike magic missile, the target is a creature.
For a spelllike firebaJl, the target is the point in space
where the ball of fire erupts.
Most spells have ranges expressed in feet. Some
spells can target only a creature (including you) that you
touch. Other spells. such as the shield spell, affect only
you. These spells have a range of self.
Spells that create cones or lines of effect that originate
from you also have a range of self, indicating that the
origin point af the spell's effect must be yau (see "Areas
af Effect" later in the this chapter).

4

Once a spell is cast, its effects aren't limited by its
range, unless the spell's description says otherwise.

COMPONENTS
A spell's components are the physical requirements you
must meet in order to cast it. Each spell's description
indicates whether it requires verbal (V), somatic (S),
or material (M) components. Ifyou can't provide one
or more of a spell's components, you are unable to
cast the spell.
VERBAL (V)

Most spells require the chanting of mystic words. The
words themselves aren't the source of the spell's power;
rather, the particular combination of sounds, with
specific pitch and resonance, sets the threads of magic
in molion. Thus, a character who is gagged or in an area
of silence, such as one created by the siJence spell, can't
cast a spell with a verbal component.
SOMATIC (S)

Spellcasting gestures might include a forceful
gesticulation or an intricate set of gestures. If a spell
requires a somalic component, the caster must have free
use of at least one hand to perform these gestures.
MATERIAL

(M)

Casting some spells requires particular objects,
specified in parentheses in the component entry.
A character can use a component pouch or a
speIlcasting focus (found in chapter 5) in place of
the components specified for a spell. But if a cost is
indicated for a component, a character must have that
specific component before he or she can cast the spell.
If a spell states that a material component is
consumed by the spell, the caster must provide this
component for each casting of the spell.
A spellcaster must have a hand free to access these
components, but it can be the same hand that he or she
uses to perform somatic components.

DURATION
A spell's duration is the length of time the spell persists.
A duration can be expressed in rounds, minutes, hours,
or even years. Some spells specify that their effects last
until the spells are dispelled or destroyed.
INSTANTANEOUS

Many spells are instantaneous. The spell harms,
heals, creates, or alters a creature or an object in a way
that can't be dispelled, beca use its magic exists only
for an instant.
CONCENTRATION

Some spells require you to maintain concentration
in order to keep their magic active. If you lose
concentration, such a spell ends.
If a spell must be maintained with concentralion,
that fact appears in its Duration entry, and lhe spell
specifics how long you can concentrate on it. Vou can
end concentration at any time (no action required).

THE SCHOOLS

OF MAGIC

••

Academies of magic group spells into eight categories called
schools of magic. Scholars, particularly wizards, apply these
categories to ali spells, believing that ali magic functions in
essentially the same way, whether it derives from rigorous
study ar is bestowed by a deity.
The schools of magic help describe spells; they have no
rules oftheir own, although some rules refer to the schools.
Abjuration spells are protective in nature, though some
of them have aggressive uses. They create magical barriers,
negate harmful effects, harm trespassers, ar banish creatures
to other planes of existence.
Conjuration spells involve the transportation of objects
and creatures from one location to another. Some spells
summon creatures ar objects to the caster's side, whereas
others allow the caster to teleport to another location. Some
conjurations create objects or effects out of nothing.
Divinalion spells reveal information, whether in the form of
secrets long forgoUen, glimpses of the future, the locations
of hidden things, the truth behind illusions, ar visions of
dislanl people or places.
Enchanlmenl spells affecl lhe minds of olhers, influencing
ar controlling lheir behavior. Such spells can make enemies
see lhe casler as a friend, force crealures lo lake a course of
aclion, ar even conlrol anolher crealure like a puppet.
Evocalion spells manipulate magical energy lo produce a
desired eITect. Some call up blasts offire ar lighlning. Olhers
channel posilive energy to heal wounds.
JIIusion spells deceive lhe senses ar minds of olhers. They
cause people lo see lhings lhal are nol lhere, lo miss lhings
lhat are there, to hear phanlom noises, ar lo remember
lhings lhal never happened. Some illusions creale phanlom
images lhal any creature can see, but lhe mosl insidious
illusions planl an image direclly in lhe mind of a crealure.
Necromancy spells manipulale the energies oflife and
dealh. Such spells can granl an exlra reserve oflife force,
drain the life energy from anolher crealure, create the
undead, ar even bring the dead back to life.
Creating the undead lhrough lhe use of necromancy spells
such as animate dead is not a good acl, and only evil caslers
use such spells frequenlly.
Transmulalion spells change lhe properties of a crealure,
object, ar environmenl. They mighl lum an enemy inlo a
harmless creature. bolsler the slrength of an ally, make an
object move aI the casler's command, ar enhance a crealure's
innale healing abililies lo rapidly recover from injury.

••

•••

Normal activity, such as moving and attacking, doesn't
interfere with concentration. The following factors can
break concentration:
Casting another speIl that requires concentration.
Vou lose concentration on a spell if you cast another
spell that requires concentration. Vou can't concentrate on two spells at once.
Taking damage. Whenever you take damage while
you are concentrating on a spell, you must make a
Constitution saving throw to maintain your concentration. The DC equals 10 or half the damage you take,
whichever number is higher.lfyou take damage from
multiple sources, such as an arrow and a dragon's
breath, you make a separate saving throw for each
source of damage.
Being incapacilated or kilIed. Vou lose concentration
on a spell if you are incapacitated or if you die.

PART 3 I SrF.l LCASTI NG
203

The DM might also decide that certain environmental
phenomena, such as a wave crashing over you while
you're on a storm-tossed ship, require you to succeed
on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw to maintain
concentration on a spell.

TARGETS
A typical spell requires you to pick one or more targets
to be affected by the spell's magic. A spell's description
tells you whether the spell targets creatures, objects, or
a point of origin for an area of effect (described below).
Unless a spell has a perceptible effect, a creature
might not know it was targeted by a spell at alI. An effect
like crackling lightning is obvious, but a more subtle
effect, such as an attempt to read a creature's thoughts,
typically goes unnoticed, unless a spell says otherwise.

A CLEAR PATH TO THE TARGET
To target something, you must have a clear path to it,
so it can't be behind total cover.
lf you place an area of effect at a point that you can't
see and an obstruction. such as a wall, is between you
and that point, the point of origin comes into being on
the near side of that obstruction.
TARGETING

YOURSELF

lf a spell targets a creature of your choice, you can
choose yourself, unless the creature must be hostile or
speciticallya creature other than you. lf you are in the
area of effect of a spell you cast, you can target yourself.

AREAS OF EFFECT
Spells such as burning hands and cone of cald cover an
area, allawing them to affect multiple creatures at ance.
A spell's description specities its area af effect,
which typically has ane of tive different shapes: cone,
cube, cylinder, line, ar sphere. Every area of effect has
a paint of origin, a locatian fram which the spell's
energy erupts. The roles for each shape specify how yau

PART 3
204

I SPELLCASTINO

pasition its point of origino Typically,
a point of origin is a point in space, but
some spells have an area whose origin is a
creature or an object.
A spell's effect expands in straight lines fram the point
of origino If no unblocked straight line extends from the
point of origin to a location within the area of effect, that
location isn't included in the spell's area. To block one of
these imaginary lines, an obstruction must provi de total
cover, as explained in chapter 9.
CONE

A cone extends in a direction you choose fram its point
af origino A cone's width at a given point along its length
is equal to that point's distance from the point of origino
A cone's area of effect specities its maximum length.
A cone's point of origin is not included in the cone's
area of effect, unless you decide otherwise.
CUBE

Vou select a cube's point of origin, which lies anywhere
on a face of the cubic effect. The cube's size is expressed
as the length of each side.
A cube's point of origin is not included in the cube's
area of effect, unless you decide otherwise.
CYLINDER

A cylinder's point of origin is the center of a circle of a
particular radius, as given in the spell description. The
circle must either be on the graund or at the height of
the spell effect. The energy in a cylinder expands in
straight lines from the point of origin to the perimeter of
the circle, forming the base of the cylinder. The spell's
effect then shoots up fram the base or down fram the
top, to a distance equal to the height of the cylinder.
A cylinder's point of origin is included in the cylinder's
area of effect.

4
LINE
Aline extends from its point of origin in a straight path
up to its length and covers an area defined by its width.
A line's point of origin is not included in the line's area
of effect, unless you decide otherwise.

SPHERE
Vou select a sphere's point of origin, and the sphere
extends outward from that point. The sphere's
size is expressed as a radius in feet that extends
from the point.
A sphere's point of origin is included in the sphere's
area of effect.

SAVING THROWS
Many spells specify that a target can make a saving
throw to avoid some or ali of a spell's effects. The spell
specifies the ability that the target uses for the save and
what happens on a success or failure.
The De to resist one of your spells equals 8 + your
spellcasting
ability modifier + your proficiency bonus +
any special modifiers.

ATTACK ROLLS
Some spells require the caster to make an attack roll
to determine whether the spell effect hits the intended
target. Your attack bonus with a spell attack equals your
spellcasting
ability modifier + your proficiency bonus.
Most spells that require attack rolls involve ranged
attacks. Remember that you have disadvantage
on a
ranged attack roll if you are within 5 feet of a hostile
creature that can see you and that isn't incapacitated
(see chapter 9).

COMBINING

MAGICAL EFFECTS

The effects of different spells add together while
the durations of those spells overlap. The effects of
the same spell cast multi pie times don't combine,
however. lnstead, the most potent effect-such
as the
highest bonus-from
those castings applies while their
durations overlap.
For example, if two clerics cast bless on the same
target, that character gains the spell's benefit only
once; he or she doesn't get to roll two bonus dice.

lHE

WEAVE OF MAGIC

••

lhe worlds within the D&D multiverse are magical places.
Ali existence is suffused with magical power, and potential
energy lies untapped in every rock, stream, and living
creature, and even in the air itself. Raw magic is the stuff of
creation, the mute and mindless will of existence, permeating
every bit of malter and present in every manifestation of
energy throughout the multiverse.
Mortais can't directly shape this raw magic. Instead, they
make use of a fabric of magic, a kind of interface between
the will of a spellcaster and the stuff of raw magic. lhe
spellcasters of the Forgotten Realms call it the Weave and
recagnize its essence as the goddess Mystra, but casters
have varied ways of naming and visualizing this interface. Sy
any name, without the Weave, raw magic is locked away and
inaccessible;the most powerful archmage can't light a candle
with magic in an area where the Weave has been tom. Sut
surrounded by the Weave, a spellcaster can shape lightning
to blast foes, transport hundreds of miles in the blink of an
eye, or even reverse death itself.
Ali magic depends on the Weave, though different kinds
of magic access it in a variety of ways. lhe spells of wizards,
warlocks, sorcerers, and bards are commonly called arcane
magic. lhese spells rely on an understanding-Iearned
or
intuitive-of the workings of the Weave. lhe caster plucks
directly at the strands of the Weave to create the desired
effect. Eldritch knights and arcane tricksters also use arcane
magic. lhe spells of derics, druids, paladins, and rangers are
called divine magic. lhese spellcasters' access to the Weave
is mediated by divine power-gods, the divine forces of
nature, or the sacred weight of a paladin's oath.
Whenever a magic effect is created, the threads of the
Weave intertwine, twist, and fold to make the effect possible.
When characters use divination spells such as detect magic or
identify, they glimpse the Weave. A spell such as dispel magic
smooths the Weave. Spells such as antimagic field rearrange
the Weave 50 that magic fiows around, rather than through,
the area affected by the spell. And in places where the Weave
is damaged or tom, magic works in unpredictable ways-or
not at alI.

CHAPTER
~

11: SPELLS

HIS CHAPTER DESCRIBES THE MOST COMMON

Hold Monster

1ST LEVEL

in the worlds of DUNGEONS &
DRAGONs.
The chapter begins with the
speIl Iists of the speIlcasting
classes. The
remainder
contains
speIl descriptions,
presented
in alphabetical
order by the
name of the spell.

Legend Lore

Bane

speIls

BARD SPELLS
CANTRIPS

(O LEVEL)

Hold Person
Invisibility
Knock

Mass Cure Wounds

Bless

Mislead

Command

Modify Memory
Planar Binding

Create or Destroy Water
Cure Wounds

Raise Dead

Detect Evil and Good

Scrying

Detect Magic

Seeming
Teleportation

Ci rcle

Blade Ward

Lesser Restoration

Dancing Lights

Locate Animais or Plants
Locate Object

6TH

Magic Mouth

Find the Path
Guards and Wards

Friends
Light

Phantasmal Force
See Invisibility

Mage Hand
Mending

Shalter

Message
Minor IlIusion

Silence

Prestidigitation

Suggestion
Zone ofTruth

True Strike

Healing Word

LEVEL

Inflict Wounds

Eyebite

Mass Suggestion
Olto's Irresistible
Programmed
True Seeing
7TH

Dance

Forcecage

Clairvoyance

Mirage Arcane
Mordenkainen's

Etherealness

Mansion

Feign Death

Mordenkainen's

Sword

Cure Wounds

Glyph ofWarding

Project Image

Detect Magic
Disguise Self

Hypnotic Pattem

Regenerate

Leomund's Tiny Hut
Major Image

Resurrection

Dissonant

Languages

Whispers

Feather Fali

Nondetection
Plant Growth

Healing Word

Sending

Faerie Fire

Enhance Ability
Find Traps
Gentle Repose
Hold Person
Lesser Restoration
Locate Object
Prayer of Healing

Symbol
Teleport
8TH

LEVEL

Blindness/Deafness
Calm Emotions
Continuai Flame

Magnificent

Comprehend

Shield of Faith

Augury

Bestow Curse

Charm Person

Sanctuary

Aid

LEVEL

1ST LEVEL

Dispel Magic
Fear

from

Evil and Good
Purify Food and Drink

2ND

3RD

Animal Friendship
Bane

Protection

IlIusion

Vicious Mockery

LEVEL

Detect Poison and Disease
Guiding Bolt

Protection

from Poison

Silence

LEVEL

Heroism

Speak with Dead

Feeblemind

Identify

Speak with Plants
Stinking Cloud

Spiritual Weapon
Warding Bond

Glibness

Zone ofTruth

Tongues

Mind Blank
Power Word Stun

3RD

9TH

Beacon of Hope

IlIusory Script
Longstrider
Silent Image

4TH

Sleep
Tasha's Hideous
Thunderwave
Unseen Servant
2ND

LEVEL

Animal Messenger
Blindness/Deafness
Calm Emotions
Cloud of Daggers
Crown of Madness
Detect Thoughts
Enhance Ability
Enthrall
Heat Metal

Laughter

Monster

LEVEL

Compulsion

Speak with Animais

Dominate

Confusion
Dimension ODor

Freedom of Movement
Greater Invisibility
Hallucinatory Terrain
Locate Creature
Polymorph

LEVEL

LEVEL

Animate Dead

Foresight

Bestow Curse

Power Word Heal

Clairvoyance

Power Word Kill

Create Food and Water
Daylight

True Polymorph

Dispel Magic

CLERIC SPELLS
CANTRIPS

(o LEVEL)

Feign Death
Glyph ofWarding
Magic Circle

Guidance
Light

Mass Healing Word
Meld into Stone

Mending

Protection

Dream

Resistance
Sacred Flame

Geas
Greater Restoration

Spare the Dying
Thaumaturgy

Remove Curse
Revivify
Sending
Speak with Dead

5TH

LEVEL

Animate Objects
Awaken
Dominate

Person

from Energy

PART 3

SPfLlS

, "

Tongues

Gate
Mass Heal

Water Walk

True Resurrection

Spirit Guardians

Dispel Magic

Mirage Arcane

Feign Death
Meld into Stone

Plane Shift
Regenerate
Reverse Gravity

Plant Growth
4TH

LEVEL

Banishment
Control Water
Death Ward
Divination
Freedom

of Movement

Guardian

of Faith

Locate Creature
Stone Shape
5TH

LEVEL

Commune

Contagion
Dispel Evil and Good
Flame Strike
Geas
Greater

Restoration

Hallow
Insect Plague
Legend Lore
Mass Cure Wounds
Planar Binding
Raise Dead
Scrying

CANTRIPS

(o LEVEL)

Guidance

Water Walk

Mending
Poison Spray

Wind Wall

Produce Flame
Resistance

Shillelagh
Thorn Whip

Earthquake
Feeblemind

4TH

Sunburst

LEVEL

Tsunami

Blight
Confusion
Conjure Minor Elementals
Conjure Woodland

Beings

Animal Friendship

Dominate

Beast

Charm Person

Freedom

of Movement

Create or Destroy Water

Giant Insect
Grasping Vine
Hallucinatory

9TH

LEVEL

Foresight
Shapechange
Storm ofVengeance
True Resurrection

PALADIN SPELLS
Terrain

Ice Storm
Locate Creature

1ST LEVEL

Faerie Fire

Polymorph

Bless
Command

Fog Cloud

Stone Shape

Compelled

Goodberry

Stoneskin

Healing Word

Wall of Fire

Cure Wounds
Detect Evil and Good

Entangle

Speak with Animais

Forbiddance

Thunderwave

Harm

LEVEL

Control Weather

Control Water

Cure Wounds
Detect Magic
Detect Poison and Disease

8TH

Animal Shapes
AntipathyjSympathy

1ST LEVEL

Find the Path

Blade Barrier

from Energy

Water Breathing

Create Undead

LEVEL

Protection

Sleet Storm
Speak with Plants

Druidcraft

jump
Longstrider
Purify Food and Drink

6TH

5TH

LEVEL

Duel

Detect Magic
Detect Poison and Disease

Antilife Shell

Divine Favor

Awaken

Heroism

Commune

with Nature

Conjure Elemental

Protection

from

Evil and Good

Contagion

Purify Food and Drink

Barkskin

Geas
Greater Restoration

Beast Sense
Darkvision

Insect Plague
Mass Cure Wounds

Searing Smite
Shield of Faith
Thunderous Smite

Enhance Ability

Planar Binding

Find Traps
Flame Blade

Reincarnate

Scrying

Divine Word

Flaming Sphere

Etherealness

Gust ofWind

Tree Stride
Wall ofStone

Fire Storm

Heat Metal

Plane Shift

Hold Person

2ND

Heal
Feast

Planar Ally
True Seeing
Word of Recall
7TH

LEVEL

Animal Messenger

Heroes'

LEVEL

Conjure Celestial

Regenerate

Lesser Restoration

Resurrection

Locate Animais or Plants

Symbol

Locate Object
Moonbeam

8TH

Pass without Trace

LEVEL

Antimagic Field
Control Weather
Earthquake
Holy Aura
9TH

LEVEL

Astral Projection

208

DRUID SPELLS

PART 3 I SPFLLS

Protection from Poison

Spike Growth
3RD

LEVEL

Call Lightning
Conjure Animais
Daylight

Wrathful Smite
2ND

LEVEL

Aid
Branding Smite
Find Steed
Lesser Restoration

6TH

LEVEL

Conjure Fey
Find the Path
Heal
Heroes' Feast
Move Earth
Sunbeam
Transport via Plants
Wall ofThorns
Wind Walk
7TH

LEVEL

Fire Storm

Locate Object
Magic Weapon
Protection from Poison
Zone ofTruth
3RD

LEVEL

Aura ofVitality
Blinding Smite
Create Food and Water
Crusader's Mantle
Daylight
Dispel Magic
Elemental Weapon

Magic Circle

Plant Growth

Sleep

Greater

Remove Curse

Protection

Thunderwave

Ice Storm

Revivify

from Energy

Speak with Plants

Witch Bolt

Polymorph

Water Breathing
4TH

LEVEL

Aura of Life

2ND

Water Walk
Wind Wall

Invisibility

Stoneskin

LEVEL

Wall of Fire

Alter Self

Aura of Purity

BlindnessjDeafness
Blur

Banishment

4TH

LEVEL

Death Ward

Conjure Woodland

Beings

Cloud of Daggers

5TH

LEVEL

Animate Objects
Cloudkill

Locate Creature

Freedom

of Movement

Crown of Madness

Cone ofCold

Staggering

Grasping

Vine

Darkness

ereation

Locate Creature

Darkvision

Stoneskin

Detect Thoughts
Enhance Ability

Dominate Person
Hold Monster

5TH

Smite

LEVEL

Banishing Smite
Cirele of Power

5TH

LEVEL

EnlargejReduce

Destructive Smite
Dispel Evil and Good

Commune

Conjure Volley

Gust ofWind
Hold Person

Teleportation

Geas

Swift Quiver
Tree Stride

Invisibility

Wall of Stone

Raise Dead

with Nature

Insect Plague
Seeming
Telekinesis

Knock
6TH

Levitate

SORCERER SPELLS

1ST LEVEL

CANTRIPS

Alarm
Animal Friendship

Acid Splash
Blade Ward

Scorching Ray
See Invisibility

Cure Wounds

Chill Touch

Shatter

Detect Magic

Dancing Lights

Spider Climb

Detect Poison and Disease

Fire Bolt

Suggestion

Ensnaring Strike
Fog Cloud
Goodberry

Friends

Web

Light
Mage Hand

Hail ofThorns

Mending

Blink

Hunter's

Message
Minor IlIusion

Clairvoyance

Poison Spray

Daylight

Prestidigitation

Dispel Magic
Fear
Fireball

)ump
Longstrider
Speak with Animais
2ND

LEVEL

Animal Messenger

(O LEVEL)

Mirror Image
Misty Step
Phantasmal

LEVEL

Arcane Gate

RANGER SPELLS

Mark

Force

Chain Lightning
Cirele of Death
Disintegrate
Eyebite
Globe of Invulnerability
Mass Suggestion
Move Earth
Sunbeam
True Seeing

3RD

Ray of Frost
Shocking Grasp
True Strike

Barkskin

LEVEL
7TH

Delayed Blast Fireball
Etherealness

Counterspell

Finger of Death

Fly
Gaseous

LEVEL

Form

Fire Storm
Plane Shift
Prismatic Spray
Reverse Gravity
Teleport

1ST LEVEL

Haste
Hypnotic

Darkvision

Burning Hands
Charm Person

Find Traps

Chromatic

Lesser Restoration

Color Spray

Protection

Locate Animais or Plants

Comprehend
Languages
Detect Magic

Sleet Storm
Slow

Sunburst

Pass without Trace
Protection from Poison

Disguise Sei f

Stinking Cloud

9TH

Silence
Spike Growth

False Life
Feather Fali

3RD

Fog Cloud
jump

Beast Sense
Cordon of Arrows

Locate Object

lEVEL

Conjure Animais
Conjure Barrage
Daylight
Lightning Arrow
Nondetection

Cirele

Orb

Expeditious

Retreat

Mage Armor
Magic Missile
Ray of Sickness
Shield
Silent Image

8TH

Pattern

Lightning Bolt
Major Image
from Energy

LEVEL

Dominate

Monster

Earthquake
Incendiary Cloud
Power Word Stun

LEVEL

Tongues

Gate

Water Breathing
Water Walk

Meteor Swarm
Power Word Kill

4TH

Time Stop
Wish

LEVEL

Banishment
Blight
Confusion
Dimension Door
Dominate

Beast

PART 3

I

SPELLS

2°9

WARLOCK SPELLS

Dimension

Door

Hallucinatory

(o LEVEL)

CANTRIPS

Blade Ward

5TH

Terrain

LEVEL

Contact Other Plane

Chill Touch

Dream

Eldritch Blast

Hold Monster

Friends

Misty Step

Alarm

Nystul's Magic Aura

Burning Hands

Phantasmal

Charm Person

Ray of Enfeeblement

Chromatic

Orb

Color Spray

Spider Climb

Arcane Gate

Expeditious

Prestidigitation

Cirele of Death

False Life

True Strike

Conjure Fey

Feather Fali

Create Undead

Find Familiar

Eyebite

Fog Cloud

Flesh to Stone

Grease

Mass Suggestion

Identify

Charm Person
Languages

Expeditious

Retreat

Retreat

LEVEL

Hex

Finger of Death

Magic Missile

IlIusory Script

Forcecage

Protection

Protection

Plane Shift

Dominate
2ND

Ray of Sickness
Shield

Demiplane

Witch Bolt
LEVEL

Monster

Crown of Madness

Power Word Stun
9TH

Enthrall
Hold Person

Unseen Servant

LEVEL

Astral Projection
Foresight

Invisibility
Mirror Image
Misty Step
Ray of Enfeeblement

Spider Climb

Power Word Kill
True Polymorph

WIZARD SPELLS
CANTRIPS

LEVEL

Acid Splash

Counterspell

Blade Ward

Dispel Magic

Chill Touch

(o LEVEL)

Fear

Dancing Lights

Fly

Fire Bolt

Gaseous Form

Friends

Hunger of Hadar

Light

Hypnotic

Mage Hand

Magic Cirele

Mending

Major Image

Message

Remove Curse

Minor IlIusion

Tongues

Poison Spray

Vampiric Touch

Prestidigitation

LEVEL

Banishment
Blight

PART 3 I SPELLS

Ray of Frost
Shocking Grasp
True Strike

Fly
Gaseous Form
Glyph ofWarding

Hypnotic

Pattern

Lightning

Tiny Hut
Bolt

Magic Cirele
Major Image
Nondetection
Phantom Steed

LEVEL

Imprisonment

Suggestion

Pattern

Witch Bolt
2ND

Shatter

4TH

Tenser's Floating Disk
Thunderwave

Darkness

Fireball

Leomund's

Tasha's Hideous Laughter

Cloud of Daggers

Feign Death

Haste

Silent Image
Sleep

Feeblemind
Glibness

3RD

from

Evil and Good

LEVEL

Counterspell

Fear

Mage Armor

8TH

Dead

Dispel Magic

Longstrider

Evil and Good

Animate

Blink

Etherealness

Unseen Servant

LEVEL

Clairvoyance

Hellish Rebuke

from

3RD

Bestow Curse

jump
7TH

Suggestion
Web

IlIusory Script

True Seeing

Comprehend

See Invisibility

Disguise Self

Poison Spray

Arms of Hadar

Languages

Shatter

6TH

Armor of Agathys

Rope Trick

Detect Magic

Minor IlIusion

1ST LEVEL

LEVEL

Force

Scorching Ray

Comprehend

Scrying

Mage Hand

210

1ST LEVEL

Protection

from Energy

Alter Self

Remove Curse

Arcane Lock

Sending

Blindness/Deafness

Sleet Storm

Blur

Slow

Cloud of Daggers

Stinking Cloud

Continuai

Tongues

Flame

Crown of Madness

Vampiric Touch

Darkness

Water Breathing

Darkvision
Detect Thoughts
Enlarge/Reduce
Flaming Sphere
Gentle Repose
Gust ofWind
Hold Person
Invisibility
Knock
Levitate
Locate Object
Magic Mouth
Magic Weapon
Melf's Acid Arrow
Mirror Image

4TH

LEVEL

Arcane Eye
Banishment
Blight
Confusion
Conjure Minor Elementals
Control Water
Dimension ODor
Evard's Black Tentades
Fabricate
Fire Shield
Greater Invisibility
Hallucinatory

Terrain

Ice Storm
Leomund's

Secret Chest

Loeale Crealure

Sunbeam

Mordenkainen's

True Seeing
Wall oflee

The spells are presented in alphabetical order.

7TH

ACID SPLASH

Failhful Hound

SPELL DESCRIPTIONS

Mordenkainen's
Privale Sanelum
Oliluke's Resilienl Sphere
Phanlasmal

Killer

Delayed BiasI Fireball

Conjuration calltrip

Elherealness

Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feel
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous

Finger of Dealh

Polymorph

Foreeeage

Slone Shape
Sloneskin

Mirage Areane
Mordenkainen's

Wall ofFire
5TH

LEVEL

Magnifieenl Mansion
Mordenkainen's
Sword

LEVEL

Animale Objeels
Bigby's Hand

Plane Shifl

Cloudkill

Projeel Image
Reverse Gravily

Prismalie Spray

Cone ofCold
Conjure Elemenlal
Conlael Olher Plane
Crealion
Dominale

Person

Sequesler
Simulaerum
Symbol
Teleporl
8TH

Field

Anlipalhy/Sympalhy

Legend Lore

Clone
Conlrol Wealher

Mislead
Modify Memory
Passwall
Planar Binding
Rary's Telepalhie

Demiplane
Dominale
Bond

Serying
Seeming
Telekinesis
Teleporlalion

LEVEL

Anlimagie

Hold Monsler

Cirele

Wall of Force
Wall of Slone

Monsler

Feeblemind
Ineendiary Cloud

Chain Lighlning
Cirele of Dealh
Conlingeney
Creale Undead
Disinlegrale
Drawmij's Inslanl
Summons

Your spell bolsters your allies with toughness and
resolve. Choose up to three crealures within range.
Each target's hit poinl maximum and current hit points
increase by 5 for the duration.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd leveI or higher, a largel's hit points
increase by an additional 5 for each slot leveI above 2nd.
ALARM

1st-leveI abjuration (ritual)

Mind Blank
Power Word Slun

Casting Time: I minule
Range: 30 feet
Components: V. S, M (a tiny bell and a piece of
fine silver wire)
Duration: 8 hours

Sunbursl
Telepalhy

LEVEL

Areane Gale

Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (a tiny strip of while clOlh)
Duration: 8 hours

Maze

Trap lhe Soul
6TH

AID

2nd-leveI abjuration

Dream
Geas

Vou hurl a bubble of acid. Choose one creature within
range, or choose two crealures within range thal are
wilhin 5 feet of each other. A target must succeed on a
Dexterity saving throw or lake Id6 acid damage.
This spell's damage increases by Id6 when you reach
5th leveI (2d6), 11th leveI (3d6), and 17lh leveI (4d6).

9TH

LEVEL

Aslral Projeelion
Foresighl
Gale
Imprisonmenl
Meleor Swarm
Power Word Kill
Prismalie Wall

Vou seI an alarm against unwanted inlrusion. Choose
a door. a window, or an area wilhin range that is no
larger lhan a 20-foot cube. Until lhe spell ends. an alarm
alerts you whenever a Tiny or larger creature louches
or enters lhe warded area. When you cast the spell, you
can designale crealures lhat won't set off the alarmo Vou
also choose whether the alarm is mental or audible.
A mental alarm alerts you with a ping in your mind
if you are within I mile of the warded area. This ping
awakens you if you are sleeping.
An audible alarm produces lhe sound of a hand bell
for 10 seconds within 60 feel.

Eyebile
Flesh lo Slone

Shapeehange
Time Slop

Globe of Invulnerabilily
Guards and Wards

True Polymorph
Weird

ALTER SELF

Magie Jar

Wish

2nd-leveI transmutation

Mass Suggeslion
Move Earlh
Oliluke's Freezing Sphere
0110'5 Irresislible Dance
Programmed Illusion

Casting Time: I action
Range: SeI f
Components: V, S
Duration: Concenlralion. up to I hour
Vou assume a different formo When you cast lhe spell.
choose one of the following options, the effects of which
last for the duralion of the spell. While lhe spelllasts,
PART 3

SPELLS
2Il

you can end one oplion as an aclion lo gain lhe benefils
of a differenl one.
AquaticAdaptation.
Vou adapl your body lo an
aqualic environmenl, sprouting gills and growing
webbing belween your fingers. Vou can brealhe
underwaler and gain a swimming speed equal lo your
walking speed.
Change Appearance. Vou lransform your appearance.
Vou decide whal you look like, including your heighl,
weighl, facial fealures, sound of your voice, hair lenglh,
coloralion, and dislinguishing characlerislics, if any,
Vou can make yourself appear as a member of anolher
race, lhough none of your slalislics change. Vou also
can'l appear as a crealure of a differenl size lhan you,
and your basic shape slays lhe same; ifyou're bipedal,
you can'l use lhis spell lo become quadrupedal, for
inslance. AI any lime for lhe duralion of lhe spell, you
can use your action lOchange your appearance in
lhis way again.
Natural Weapons. Vou grow claws, fangs, spines,
horns, or a differenl nalural weapon of your choice. Your
unarmed slrikes deal ld6 bludgeoning, piercing, or
slashing damage, as appropriale lo lhe nalural weapon
you chose, and you are proficienl wilh your unarmed
slrikes. Finally, lhe natural weapon is magic and you
have a +1 bonus lo lhe atlack and damage rolls you
make using it.
ANIMAL

FRIENDSHIP

lst.level enchantment
Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V,S, M (a morsel of food)
Duration: 24 hours
This spelllels you convince a beasl lhal you mean il no
harm. Choose a beasl lhal you can see wilhin range.
It musl see and hear you. Ir lhe beast's Inlelligence is
4 or higher, lhe spell fails. Olherwise, lhe beasl musl
succeed on a Wisdom saving lhrow or be charmed
by you for lhe spell's duralion. If you or one of your
companions harms lhe largel, lhe spells ends.
At Higher LeveIs. When you casl lhis spell using
a spell sI01 of 2nd leveI or higher, you can affecl one
addilional beasl for each slol leveI above 1st.

localion, covering aboul 50 miles per 24 hours for a
flying messenger, or 25 miles for olher animaIs.
When lhe messenger arrives, il delivers your message
lo lhe crealure lhal you described, replicating lhe sound
of your voice. The messenger speaks only lo a crealure
malching lhe descriplion you gave. If lhe messenger
doesn'l reach its deslinalion before lhe spell ends, lhe
message is losl, and lhe beasl makes ils way back to
where you casl lhis spell.
At Higher LeveIs. If you casl lhis spell using a spell
slot of 3nd levei or higher, lhe duralion of lhe spell
increases by 48 hours for each slol levei above 2nd.
ANIMAL

Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V,S
Duration: Concenlralion, up to 24 hours
Your magic lurns others into beasts. Choose any
number of willing crealures lhal you can see within
range. Vou transform each targel into the form of a
Large or smaller beasl wilh a challenge rating of 4 or
lower. On subsequent turns, you can use your action to
transform affected creatures inlo new forms.
The transformation lasls for lhe duration for each
largel, or until the target drops to O hit points or dies.
Vou can choose a different form for each larget. A
largel's game stalistics are replaced by the stalislics of
lhe chosen beast, though the largel relains ils alignmenl
and Inlelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores. The
largel assumes lhe hil poinls of ils new form, and when
it reverls lo ils normal form, il relurns to the number
of hil points it had before il lransformed. If il reverls as
a result of dropping to O hit poinls, any excess damage
carries over lo ils normal formoAs long as the excess
damage doesn'l reduce lhe crealure's normal form lo O
hil poinls, it isn'l knocked unconscious. The creature is
limiled in lhe aclions il can perform by lhe nalure of its
new form, and it can'l speak or casl spells.
The largel's gear melds into lhe new formoThe largel
can't aclivate, wield, or olherwise benefil from any of
ils equipment.
ANIMATE

ANIMAL

MESSENGER

2nd.level enchantment (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V,S, M (a morsel of food)
Duration: 24 hours
By means of lhis spell, you use an animal to deliver a
message. Choose a Tiny beasl you can see wilhin range,
such as a squirrel, a blue jay, or a bat. Vou specify a
localion, which you musl have visiled, and a recipienl
who malches a general descriplion, such as "a man or
woman dressed in lhe uniform of lhe town guard" or "a
red.haired dwarf wearing a poinled hat." Vou also speak
a message of up lOlwenly-five words. The largel beasl
lravels for lhe duralion of lhe spell loward lhe specified

212

PART 3 I SPELLS

SHAPES

8th./evel transmutatioIl

DEAD

3rd./evel necromancy
Casting Time: 1 minule
Range: 10 feel
Components: V, S, M (a drop of blood, a piece of flesh,
and a pinch of bone dust)
Duration: Inslanlaneous
This spell creates an undead servant. Choose a pile
of bones or a corpse of a Medium or Small humanoid
within range. Your spell imbues lhe targel wilh a foul
mimicry of life, raising il as an undead crealure. The
largel becomes a skeleton if you chose bones or a
zombie if you chose a corpse (lhe DM has lhe crealure's
game slalislics).
On each of your lurns, you can use a bonus aclion
lOmentally command any crealure you made with
lhis spell if lhe creature is within 60 feel of you (if you

control multi pie creatures, you can command any or all
of them at the same time, issuing the same command to
each one). Vou decide what action the creature will take
and where it will move during its next turn, or you can
issue a general command, such as to guard a particular
chamber or corridor. lf you issue no commands, the
creature only defends itself against hostile creatures.
Once given an order, the creature continues to follow it
until its task is complete.
The creature is under your control for 24 hours,
after which it stops obeying any command you've given
it. To maintain control of the creature for another
24 hours, you must cast this spell on the creature
again before the current 24-hour period ends. This
use of the spell reasserts your control over up to four
creatures you have animated with this spell, rather than
animating a new one.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, you animate or reassert
contraI over two additional undead creatures for each
slot levei above 3rd. Each of the creatures must come
from a different corpse or pile of bones.
ANIMATE

Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Objects come to \ife at your command. Choose up to
ten nonmagical objects within range that are not being
worn or carried. Medium targets count as two objects,
Large targets count as four objects, Huge targets
count as eight objects. Vou can't animate any object
larger than Huge. Each target animates and becomes a
creature under your contrai until the spell ends or until
reduced to O hit points.
As a bonus action, you can mentally command any
creature you made with this spell if the creature is
within 500 feet of you (if you contrai multiple creatures,
you can command any or all of them at the same time,
issuing the same command to each one). Vou decide
what action the creature will take and where it will
move during its next turn, or you can issue a general
command, such as to guard a particular chamber or
corridor. If you issue no commands, the creature only
defends itself against hostile creatures. Once given
an order, the creature continues to follow it until its
task is complete.
OB/ECT

ANTILIFE

SHELL

5th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (I O-foot radius)
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour

OBJECTS

5th-leveI transmutation

ANIMATED

are 3, and its Charisma is 1. Its speed is 30 feet; if the
object lacks legs or other appendages it can use for
locomotion, it instead has a f1yingspeed of 30 feet and
can hover. lf the object is securely attached to a surface
or a larger object, sue h as a chain bolted to a wall, its
speed is O. It has blindsight with a radius of 30 feet and
is b\ind beyond that distance. When the animated object
drops to O hit points, it reverts to its original object
form, and any remaining damage carries over to its
original object formo
lf you command an object to attack, it can make a
single melee attack against a creature within 5 feet
of it. [t makes a slam attack with an attack bonus and
bludgeoning damage determined by its size. The DM
might rule that a specific object inflicts slashing or
piercing damage based on its formo
At Higher Leve/s. Ifyou cast this spell using a
spell slot of 6th leveI or higher, you can animate two
additional objects for each slot leveI above 5th.

STATISTICS

Size

HP

AC Attack

Str

Dex

Tiny
5mall
Medium
Large

20
25
40
50

18
16
13
10

+8 to hit, 1d4 + 4 damage
+6 to hit, ld8 + 2 damage
+5 to hit. 2d6 + 1 damage
+6 to hit. 2dlO + 2 damage

4
6

18
14

10

12

14

10

Huge

80

10

+8 to hit. 2d12 + 4 damage

18

6

An animated object is a construct with AC, hit points,
attacks, Strength, and Dexterity determined by its size.
Its Constitution is 10 and its Intelligence and Wisdom

A shimmering barrier extends out from you in a IO-foot
radius and moves with you, remaining centered on
you and hedging out creatures other than undead and
constrllcts. The barrier lasts for the duration.
The barrier prevents an affected creature from
passing or reaching through. An affected creature
can cast spells or make attacks with ranged or reach
weapons through the barrier.
If you move so that an affected creatllre is forced to
pass through the barrier, the spell ends.
ANTIMAGIC

FIELD

8th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self (IO-foot-radius sphere)
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of powdered iron or
iron filings)
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
A 10-foot-radius invisible sphere of antimagic surraunds
you. This area is divorced fram the magical energy that
suffuses the multiverse. Within the sphere, spells can't
be cast, summoned creatures disappear, and even magic
items become mundane. Unti! the spell ends, the sphere
moves with you, centered on you.
Spells and other magical effects, except those created
by an artifact or a deity, are suppressed in the sphere
and can't protrude into it. A slot expended to cast
a suppressed spell is consumed. While an effect is
suppressed, it doesn't function, but the time it spends
suppressed counts against its duration.
Targeted Effects. Spells and other magical effects,
such as ma(jic missi/e and charm person, that target
a creature or an object in the sphere have no effect
on that target.

PART 3

SPELLS

213

Areas ofMagie. The area of another spell or magical
effect, such as fireball, can't extend into the sphere.
If the sphere overlaps an area of magic, the part of
the area that is covered by the sphere is suppressed.
For example, the liames created by a wall of fire are
suppressed within the sphere, creating a gap in the wall
if the overlap is large enough.
Spells. Any active spell or other magical effect on a
creature or an object in the sphere is suppressed while
the creature or object is in i!.
Magie ltems. The properties and powers of
magic items are suppressed in the sphere. For
example, a +llongsword in the sphere functions as a
nonmagicallongsword.
A magic weapon's properties and powers are
suppressed if it is used against a target in the sphere or
wielded by an attacker in the sphere. If a magic weapon
or a piece of magic ammunition fully leaves the sphere
(for example, if you fire a magic arrow or throw a magic
spear at a target outside the sphere), the magic of the
item ceases to be suppressed as soon as it exits.
Magieal TraveI. Teleportation and planar travei
fail to work in the sphere, whether the sphere is the
destination or the departure point for such magical
traveI. A portal to another location, world, or plane of
existence, as well as an opening to an extradimensional
space such as that created by the rope trick spell,
temporarily doses while in the sphere.
Creatures and Objeets. A creature or object
summoned or created by magic temporarily winks out
of existence in the sphere. Such a creature instantly
reappears once the space the creature occupied is no
longer within the sphere.
Dispel Magie. Spells and magical effects such as
dispel magic have no effect on the sphere. Likewise, the
spheres created by different antimagic field spells don't
nullify each other.
ANTIPATHy/SYMPATHY

8th~evelenchantment
Casting Time: 1 hour
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S, M (either a lump of alum soaked in
vinegar for the antipathy effect or a drop of honey for
the sympathy effect)
Duration: 10 days
This spell attracts or repels creatures of your choice.
Vou target something within range, either a Huge or
smaller object or creature or an area that is no larger
than a 200.foot cube. Then specify a kind of intelligent
creature, such as red dragons, goblins, or vampires.
Vou invest the target with an aura that either attracts or
repels the specified creatures for the duration. Choose
antipathy or sympathy as the aura's effec!.
Antipathy. Thc cnchantmcnt causes creatures of the
kind you designated to feel an intense urge to leave the
area and avoid the targe!. When such a creature can
see the target or comes within 60 feet of it, the creature
must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or become
frightened. The creature remains frightened while it can
see the target or is within 60 feet of i!. While frightened
by the target, the creature must use its movement to
211

PART

3

I SPELLS

move to the nearest safe spot from which it can't see
the targe!. If the creature moves more than 60 feet from
the target and can't see it, the creature is no longer
frightened, but the creature becomes frightened again if
it regains sight of the target or moves within 60 feet of i!.
Sympathy. The enchantment causes the specified
creatures to feel an intense urge to approach the target
while within 60 feet of it or able to see it. When such a
creature can see the target or comes within 60 feet of it,
the creature must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or
use its movement on each of its turns to enter the area
or move within reach of the targe!. When the creature
has done so, it can't willingly move away fram the targe!.
If the target damages or otherwise harms an affected
creature, the affected crealure can make a Wisdom
saving throw to end the effect, as described below.
Ending the Elfeet. If an affected creature ends its
turn while not within 60 feet of the target or able to see
it, the creature makes a Wisdom saving thraw. On a
successful save, the creature is no longer affected by
the target and recognizes the feeling of repugnance or
attraction as magical. In addition, a creature affected by
the spell is allowed another Wisdom saving throw every
24 hours while the spell persists.
A creature that successfully saves against this effect
is immune to it for 1 minute, after which time it can be
affected again.
ARCANE EYE

4th.level divination
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (a bit of bat fur)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Vou create an invisible, magical eye within range that
hovers in the air for the duration.
Vou mentally receive visual information fram the eye,
which has normal vision and darkvision out to 30 fee!.
The eye can look in every direction.
As an action, you can move the eye up to 30 feet in
any direction. There is no limit to how far away from
you the eye can move, but it can't enter another plane
of existence. A solid barrier blocks the eye's movement,
but the eye can pass through an opening as small as 1
inch in diameter.
ARCANE

GATE

6th.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 500 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou create linked teleportation portais that remain open
for the duration. Choose two points on the graund that
you can see, one point within 10 feet ofyou and one
point within 500 feet of you. A circular portal, 10 feet
in diameter, opens over each poin!. If the portal would
open in the space occupied by a creature, the spell fails,
and the casting is los!.
The portais are two.dimensional glowing rings
filled with mist, hovering inches fram lhe ground and

perpendicular to it at the points you choose. A ring is
visible only from one side (your choice), which is the side
that functions as a portal.
Any creature or object entering the portal exits from
the other portal as if the two were adjacent to each
other; passing through a portal from the nonportal side
has no effect. The mist that fills each portal is opaque
and blocks vision through it. On your turn, you can
rotate the rings as a bonus action so that the active side
faces in a different direction.
ARCANE LOCK

2nd-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (gold dust worth at least 25 gp,
which the spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled
Vou touch a closed door, window, gate, chest, or other
entryway, and it becomes locked for the duration. Vou
and the creatures you designate when you cast this
spell can open the object normally. Vou can also set a
password that, when spoken within 5 feet of the object,
suppresses this spell for 1 minute. Otherwise, it is
impassable until it is broken or the spell is dispelled or
suppressed. Casting knock on the object suppresses
arcane lock for 10 minutes.
While affected by this spell, the object is more difficult
to break or force open; the DC to break it or pick any
locks on it increases by 10.
ARMOR OF AGATHYS

1st-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V, S, M (a cup of water)
Duration: 1 hour
A protective magical force surrounds you, manifesting
as a spectral frost that covers you and your gear.
Vou gain 5 temporary hit points for the duration. If a
creature hits you with a melee attack while you have
these hit points, the creature takes 5 cold damage.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, both the temporary hit
points and the cold damage increase by 5 for each slot
leveI above 1st.
AR MS OF HADAR

1st-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self (lO-foot radius)
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou invoke the power of Hadar, the Dark Hunger.
Tendrils of dark energy erupt from you and batter ali
creatures within 10 feet of you. Each creature in that
area must make a Strength saving throw. On a failed
save, a target takes 2d6 necrotic damage and can't take
reactions until its next turno On a successful save, the
creature takes half damage, but suffers no other effect.

At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, the damage increases by
Id6 for each slot leveI above 1st.
ASTRAL PROJECTION

9th-leveI necromancy
Casting Time: 1 hour
Range: 10 feet
Components: V, S, M (for each creature you affect with
this spell, you must provide one jacinth worth at least
1,000 gp and one ornately carved bar of silver worth
at least 100 gp, ali of which the spell consumes)
Duration: Special
Vou and up to eight willing creatures within range
project your astral bodies into the Astral Plane (the
spell fails and the casting is wasted ifyou are already
on that plane). The material body you leave behind is
unconscious and in a state of suspended animation; it
doesn't need food or air and doesn't age.
Your astral body resembles your mortal form in
almost every way, replicating your game statistics and
possessions. The principal difference is the addition of
a silvery cord that extends from between your shoulder
blades and trails behind you, fading to invisibility after
1 fool. This cord is your tether to your material body. As
long as the tether remains intact, you can find your way
home. If the cord is cut-something that can happen
only when an effect specifically states that it does-your
soul and body are separated, killing you instantly.
Your astral form can freely travei through the Astral
Plane and can pass through portais there leading to any
other plane. Ifyou enter a new plane or return to the
plane you were on when casting this spell, your body and
possessions are transported along the silver cord, allowing
you to re-enter your body as you ente r the new plane.
Your astral form is a separate incarnation. Any damage
or other effects that apply to it have no effect on your
physical body, nor do they persist when you return to it.
The spell ends for you and your companions when
you use your action to dismiss il. When the spell ends,
the affected creature returns to its physical body,
and it awakens.
The spell might also end early for you or one of your
companions. A successful dispel magic spell used
against an astral or physical body ends the spell for that
creature. If a creature's original body or its astral form
drops to O hit points, the spell ends for that creature. If
the spell ends and the silver cord is intact, the cord pulls
the creature's astral form back to its body, ending its
state of suspended animation.
If you are returned to your body prematurely, your
companions remain in their astral forms and must find
their own way back to their bodies, usually by dropping
to O hit points.
AUGURY

2nd-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: Sei f
Components: V, S, M (specially marked sticks, bones,
or similar tokens worth at least 25 gp)
Duration: Instantaneous
PART 3

SPELLS

215

By casting gem-inlaid sticks, rolling dragon bones,
laying out ornate cards, or employing some other
divining tool, you receive an omen from an otherworldly
entity about the results of a specific course of action that
you plan to take within the next 30 minutes, The DM
chooses from the following possible omens:
Weal, for good results
Woe, for bad results
Weal and woe, for both good and bad results
Nothing, for results that aren't especially good or bad
The spell doesn't take into account any possible
circumstances that might change the outcome, such
as the casting of additional spells or the loss or gain
of a companion.
If you cast the spell two or more times before
completing your next long rest, there is a cumulative 25
percent chance for each casting after the first that you
get a random reading. The DM makes this roll in secret.
AURA OF LIFE

4th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (30-foot radius)
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Life-preserving energy radiates from you in an aura with
a 30-foot radius. Until the spell ends, the aura moves
with you, centered on you. Each nonhostile creature
in the aura (including you) has resistance to necrotic
damage, and its hit point maximum can't be reduced. In
addition, a nonhostile, living creature regains I hit point
when it starts its turn in the aura with O hit points.
AURA OF PURITY

4th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Sei f (30-foot radius)
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Purifying energy radiates from you in an aura with a
30-foot radius. Until the spell ends, the aura moves
with you, centered on you. Each nonhostile creature
in the aura (including you) can't become diseased,
has resistance to poison damage, and has advantage
on saving throws against effects that cause any of the
following conditions: blinded, charmed, deafened,
frightened, paralyzed, poisoned, and stunned.
AURA OF VITALITY

3rd-level evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (30-foot radius)
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Healing energy radiates from you in an aura with a
30-foot radius. Until the spell ends, the aura moves with
you, centered on you. Vou can use a bonus action to
cause one creature in the aura (including you) to regain
2d6 hit points.

216

PART 3 I SPEI.LS

AWAKEN

5th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: 8 hours
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (an agate worth at least 1,000 gp,
which the spell consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous
After spending the casting time tracing magical
pathways within a precious gemstone, you touch a Huge
or smaller beast or plant. The target must have either
no Intelligence score or an Intelligence of 3 or less. The
target gains an Intelligence of 10. The target also gains
the ability to speak one language you know. ]f the target
is a plant, it gains the ability to move its Iimbs, roots,
vines, creepers, and so forth, and it gains senses similar
to a human's. Your DM chooses statistics appropriate
for the awakened plant, such as the statistics for the
awakened shrub or the awakened tree.
The awakened beast or plant is charmed by you for
30 days or until you or your companions do anything
harmful to it. When the charmed condition ends,
the awakened creature chooses whether to remain
friendly to you, based on how you treated it while
it was charmed.
BANE

1st-leveI enchantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (a drop of blood)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Up to three creatures of your choice that you can see
within range must make Charisma saving throws.
Whenever a target that fails this saving throw makes
an attack roll or a saving throw before the spell ends,
the target must roll a d4 and subtract the number rolled
from the attack roll or saving throw.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot leveI above 1st.
BANISHING

SMITE

5th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
The next time you hit a creature with a weapon attack
before this spell ends, your weapon crackles with force,
and the attack deals an extra 5dlO force damage to the
target. Additionally, if this attack reduces the target
to 50 hit points or fewer, you banish it. If the target is
native to a different plane of existence than the one
you're on, the target disappears, returning to its home
plane. ]f the target is native to the plane you're on, the
creature vanishes into a harmless demiplane. While
there, the target is incapacitated. It remains there until
the spell ends, at which point the target reappears in the
space it left or in the nearest unoccupied space if that
space is occupied.

J

I

BANISHMENT

4th-level abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5, M (an item distastefuI to the target)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Vou attempt to send one creature that you can see
within range to another plane of existence. The
target must succeed on a Charisma saving throw
ar be banished.
1f the target is native to the plane of existence you're
on, you banish the target to a harmless demiplane.
While there, the target is incapacitated. The target
remains there until the spel1 ends, at which point the
target reappears in the space it left ar in the nearest
unoccupied space if that space is occupied.
1fthe target is native to a different plane of existence
than the one you're on, the target is banished with
a faint popping noise, returning to its home plane.
]f the spel1 ends before 1 minute has passed, the
target reappears in the space it left ar in the nearest
unoccupied space if that space is occupied. Otherwise,
the target doesn't returno
At Higher Levels. When you cast this spel1 using
a spel1 slot of 5th levei ar higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot levei above 4th.
BARKSKIN

2nd-level transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (a handfuI of oak bark)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Vou touch a willing creature. Until the spel1 ends, the
target's skin has a rough, bark-like appearance, and the
target's AC can't be less than 16, regardless ofwhat kind
of armar it is wearing.
BEACON OF HOPE

3rd-level abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
This spel1 bestows hope and vitality. Choose any
number of creatures within range. For the duration,
each target has advantage on Wisdom saving throws
and death saving throws, and regains the maximum
number of hit points possible from any healing.
BEAST SENSE

2nd-level divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: 5
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Vou touch a willing beast. For the duration of the speIl,
you can use your action to see through the beast's eyes
and hear what it hears, and continue to do so until
you use your action to return to your normal senses.

,

While perceiving through the beast's senses, you gain
the benefits of any special senses possessed by that
creature, though you are blinded and deafened to your
own surroundings,
BESTOW

CURSE

3rd-/evel nccromancy
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
You louch a creature, and that creature must succeed
on a Wisdom saving throw or become cursed for the
duration of the spelL When you cast this spell, choose
the nature of the curse from the following options:
Choose one ability score. While cursed, the target
has disadvantage on ability checks and saving throws
made with that ability score.
While cursed, the target has disadvantage on attack
rolls against you.
While cursed, the target must make a Wisdom saving throw at the start of each of its turns. lf it fails, it
wastes its action that turn doing nothing.
While the target is cursed, your attacks and spells
deal an extra ld8 necrotic damage to the target.
A remove curse spell ends this effect. At the DM's
option, you may choose an alternative curse effect, but
it should be no more powerful than those described
above. The DM has final say on such a curse's effect.
At Higher LeveIs. If you cast this spell using a spell
slot of 4th levei or higher, the duration is concentration,
up to 10 minutes. If you use a spell slot of 5th levei or
higher, the duration is 8 hours. If you use a spell slot of
7th level or higher, the duration is 24 hours. If you use
a 9th levei spell slot, the spelllasts until it is dispelled.
Using a spell slot of 5th levei or higher grants a duration
that doesn't require concentration.
BIGBY'S

HAND

5th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S, M (an eggshell and a
snakeskin glove)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
You create a Large hand of shimmering, translucent
force in an unoccupied space that you can see within
range. The hand lasts for the spell's duration, and it
moves at your command, mimicking the movements of
your own hand.
The hand is an object that has AC 20 and hit points
equal to your hit point maximum. lf it drops to Ohit
points, the spell ends. It has a Strength of 26 (+8) and a
Dexterity of 10 (+0). The hand doesn't fill its spaee.
When you cast the spell and as a bonus action on your
subsequent turns, you can move the hand up to 60 feet
and then cause one of the following effects with it.
Clenched Fist. The hand strikes one creature or
object within 5 feet of it. Make a melee spell attack for

PART 3
218

I S PELLS

the hand using your game statistics. On a hit, the target
takes 4d8 force damage.
Forceful Hand. The hand attempts to push a creature
within 5 feet of it in a direction you choose. Make
a check with the hand's Strength contested by the
Strength (Athletics) check of the target. lf the target is
Medium or smaller, you have advantage on the check. lf
you succeed, the hand pushes the target up to 5 feet plus
a number of feet equal to five times your spellcasting
ability modifier. The hand moves with the target to
remain within 5 feet of it.
Grasping Hand. The hand attempts to grapple a Huge
or smaller creature within 5 feet of it. You use the hand's
Strength score to resolve the grapple. If the target is
Medium or smaller, you have advantage on the check.
While the hand is grappling the target, you can use a
bonus action to have the hand crush it. When you do
so, the target takes bludgeoning damage equal to 2d6 +
your spellcasting ability modifier.
lnterposing Hand. The hand interposes itself
between you and a creature you choose until you give
the hand a different command. The hand moves to stay
between you and the target, providing you with half
cover against the target. The target can't move through
the hand's space if its Strength score is less than or
equal to the hand's Strength score. If its Strength score
is higher than the hand's Strength score, the target can
move toward you through the hand's space, but that
space is difficuIt terrain for the target.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the damage from the
clenched fist option increases by 2d8 and the damage
from the grasping hand increases by 2d6 for each slot
leveI above 5th.
BLADE

BARRIER

6th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
You create a vertical wall of whirling, razor-sharp blades
made of magical energy. The wall appears within range
and lasts for the duration. You can make a straight wall
up to 100 feet long, 20 feet high, and 5 feet thick, or a
ringed wall up to 60 feet in diameter, 20 feet high, and
5 feet thick. The wall provides three-quarters cover to
creatures behind it, and its space is difficult terrain.
When a creature enters the wall's area for the first
time on a turn or starts its turn there, the creature must
make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save. the
creature takes 6d1O slashing damage. On a successful
save, the creature takes half as much damage.
BLADE

WARD

Abjuratian cantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V,S
Duration: 1 round

Vou extend your hand and trace a sigi! ofwarding in the
air. Unti! the end of your next turo. you have resistance
against bludgeoning, piercing, and slashing damage
dealt by weapon attacks.
BLESS

ls~levelenchantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M (a sprinkling of holy water)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Vou bless up to three creatures of your choice within
range. Whenever a target makes an attack roll or a
saving throw before the spell ends, the target can roll
a d4 and add the number rolled to the attack roll or
saving throw.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot levei above 1st.
BLIGHT

4th.level necromancy
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Necromantic energy washes over a creature of your
choice that you can see within range, draining moisture
and vitality from it. The target must make a Constitution
saving throw. The target takes 8d8 necrotic damage on
a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful
one. This spell has no effect on undead or constructs.
lf you target a plant creature or a magical plant, it
makes the saving throw with disadvantage, and the spell
deals maximum damage to it.
lfyou target a nonmagical plant that isn't a creature,
such as a tree or shrub, it doesn't make a saving throw;
it simply withers and dies.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 5th levei or higher, the damage increases by
Id8 for each slot leveI above 4th.
BLINDING

SMITE

BLINDNESS/DEAFNESS

2nd.level necromancy
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V
Duration: 1 minute
Vou can blind or deafen a foe. Choose one creature that
you can see within range to make a Constitution saving
throw. If it fails, the target is either blinded or deafened
(your choice) for the duration. At the end of each of its
turos, the target can make a Constitution saving throw.
On a success, the spell ends.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot levei above 2nd.
BLINK

3rd.level transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V,S
Duration: 1 minute
Roll a d20 at the end of each of your turos for the
duration of the spell. On a roll of 11 or higher, you
vanish from your current plane of existence and appear
in the Ethereal Plane (the spell fails and the casting is
wasted if you were already on that plane). At the start of
your next turo, and when the spell ends if you are on the
Ethereal Plane, you returo to an unoccupied space of
your choice that you can see within 10 feet of the space
you vanished from. lf no unoccupied space is available
within that range, you appear in the nearest unoccupied
space (chosen at random if more than one space is
equally near). Vou can dismiss this spell as an action.
While on the Ethereal Plane, you can see and hear
the plane you originated from, which is cast in shades
of gray, and you can't see anything there more than 60
feet away. Vou can only affect and be affected by other
creatures on the Ethereal Plane. Creatures that aren't
there can't perceive you or interact with you, unless they
have the ability to do sO.
BLUR

3rd.level evocation

2nd./evel illusion

Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute

The next time you hit a creature with a melee weapon
attack during this spell's duration, your weapon flares
with bright light, and the attack deals an extra 3d8
radiant damage to the target. Additionally, the target
must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or be
blinded unti! the spell ends.
A creature blinded by this spell makes another
Constitution saving throw at the end of each of its turns.
On a successful save, it is no longer blinded.

Your body becomes blurred, shifting and wavering to
all who can see YOU.For the duration, any creature has
disadvantage on attack rolls against you. An attacker
is immune to this effect if it doesn't rely on sight,
as with blindsight, or can see through illusions, as
with truesight.
BRANDING

SMITE

2nd.level evocation
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: Self

PART 3 I SPELLS

9

21

Components: V
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo I minule
The nexl lime you hil a crealure wilh a weapon attack
before lhis spell ends, lhe weapon gleams wilh aslral
radiance as you slrike, The attack deals an exlra 2d6
radianl damage lo lhe largel, which becomes visible if
il's invisibie, and lhe largel sheds dim lighl in a 5.fool
radius and can'l become invisible unlil lhe spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When you casl lhis spell using
a spell slol of 3rd levei or higher, lhe exlra damage
increases by ld6 for each sI01 levei above 2nd.
BURNING

HANDS

1st.leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: Self (15-foot cone)
Components: V, S
Duration: Inslanlaneous
As you hold your hands wilh lhumbs louching and
fingers spread, a lhin sheel of flames shools forlh from
your outslretched fingerlips. Each crealure in a 15-fool
cone musl make a Dexlerily saving lhrow. A crealure
lakes 3d6 fire damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.
The fire ignites any flammable objecls in lhe area lhal
aren'l being woro or carried.
At Higher Leve/s. When you casl lhis spell using a
spell slol of 2nd levei or higher, lhe damage increases by
ld6 for each slol levei above 1st.
CALL LIGHTNING

3rd-IeveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 120 feel
Components: V, S
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo 10 minutes
A slorm cloud appears in the shape of a cylinder lhal
is 10 feet lall wilh a 60.fool radius, cenlered on a poinl
you can see 100 feel direclly above you. The spell fails
if you can'l see a poinl in lhe air where lhe slorm cloud
could appear (for example, if you are in a room lhal can't
accommodale lhe cloud).
When you casl lhe spell, choose a poinl you can see
wilhin range. AbolI of lightning flashes down from lhe
cloud lOlhal point. Each crealure wilhin 5 feel of lhal
point musl make a Dexlerily saving throw. A crealure
lakes 3d 10 lighlning damage on a failed save, or half
as much damage on a successful one. On each of your
luros unlil lhe spell ends, you can use your aclion lo call
down lighlning in lhis way again, largeting lhe same
poinl or a different one.
lfyou are ouldoors in slormy condilions when you
casl lhis spell, lhe spell gives you control over lhe
exisling slorm inslead of creating a new ooe. Under
such condilions, lhe spell's damage increases by ld 10.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast lhis spell using a
spell si01of 41h or higher levei, lhe damage increases by
IdlO for each si01 levei above 3rd.

CALM EMOTIONS

2nd.level enehantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V.S
Duration: Concentration. up to 1 minute
Vou attempt to suppress strong emotions in a group
of people. Eaeh humanoid in a 20-foot.radius sphere
eentered on a point you choose within range must make
a Charisma saving throw; a creature can choose to
fail this saving throw if it wishes. [f a creature fails its
saving throw. choose one of the following two effects.
Vou can suppress any effect causing a target to be
charmed or frightened. When this spell ends. any
suppressed effeet resumes. provided that its duration
has not expired in the meantime.
Alternatively. you can make a target indifferent about
ereatures of your ehoice that it is hostile toward. This
indifference ends if the target is attaeked or harmed by
a spell or if it witnesses any of its friends being harmed.
When the spell ends. the creature becomes hostile
again. unless the DM rules otherwise.
CHAIN

LIGHTNING

6th.level evoeation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 150 feet
Components: V.S. M (a bit of fur; a piece of amber.
glass. or a crystal rod; and three silver pins)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou create a bolt of lightning that ares toward a target of
your choice that you can see within range. Three bolts
then leap from that target to as many as three other
targets. each of which must be within 30 feet of the tirst
target. A target can be a creature or an objeet and ean
be targeted by only one of the bolts.
A target must make a Dexterity saving throw. The
target takes lOd8 lightning damage on a failed save. or
half as much damage on a successful one.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 7th levei or higher. one additional bolt
leaps from the tirst target to another target for each slot
levei above 6th.
CHARM PERSON

lst.level enehantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: 1 hour
Vou attempt to eharm a humanoid you can see within
range. It must make a Wisdom saving throw. and does
so with advantage if you or your companions are tighting
it. [f it fails the saving throw. it is charmed by you until
the spell ends or until you or your companions do
anything harmful to it. The charmed ereature regards
you as a friendly acquaintance. When the spell ends. the
creature knows it was eharmed by you.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 2nd levei or higher. you can target one

additional creature for each slot levei above 1sI. The
creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when
you target them.
CHILL TOUCH

Neeromaneyeantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: 1 round
Vou create a ghostly. skeletal hand in the space of a
creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack
against the creature to assail it with the chill of the
grave. On a hit. the target takes ld8 necrotic damage.
and it can't regain hit points until the start of your next
turno Until then, the hand clings to the target.
Ifyou hit an undead target. it also has disadvantage on
attack rolls against you until the end of your next turno
This spell's damage increases by ld8 when you reach
5th levei (2d8). 11th leveI (3d8), and 17th levei (4d8).
CHROMATIC

ORB

1st.level evoeation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V, S. M (a diamond worth at least 50 gp)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou hurl a 4-ineh-diameter sphere of energy at a
creature that you can see within range. Vou choose
acid, cold. tire, lightning, poison, or thunder for the type
of orb you create. and then make a ranged spell attack
against the target. lf the attack hits. the creature takes
3d8 damage of the type you ehose.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher. the damage inereases by
ld8 for each slot levei above 1st.
CIRCLE OF DEATH

6th-levei neeromaney
Casting Time: 1 aetion
Range: 150 feet
Components: V, S. M (the powder of a erushed black
pearl worth at least 500 gp)
Duration: Instantaneous
A sphere of nega tive energy ripples out in a 60.footradius sphere from a point within range. Eaeh creature
in that area must make a Constitution saving throw. A
target takes 8d6 necrotie damage on a failed save. or
half as much damage on a successful one.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 7th leveI or higher. the damage increases by
2d6 for each slot levei above 6th.
CIRCLE OF POWER

5th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self (30-foot radius)
Components: V
Duration: Concentration. up to 10 minutes

PART 3

SP£LLS
221

Divine energy radiates from you, distorting and
diffusing magical energy within 30 feet of you. Until
the spell ends, the sphere moves with you, centered on
you. For the duration, each friendly creature in the area
(including you) has advantage on saving throws against
spells and other magical effects. Additionally, when
an affected creature succeeds on a saving throw made
against a spell ar magical effect that allows it to make a
saving throw to take only half damage, it instead takes
no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw.
CLAIRVOYANCE

3rd-/evel divination
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 1 mile
Components: V,5, M (a focus worth at least 100
gp, either a jeweled horn for hearing ar a glass
eye for seeing)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou create an invisible sensor within range in a location
familiar to you (a place you have visited ar seen before)
ar in an obvious location that is unfamiliar to you (such
as behind a doar, around a corner, ar in a grove of trees).
The senso r remains in place for the duration, and it
can't be attacked ar otherwise interacted with.
When you cast the spell, you choose seeing ar
hearing. Vou can use the chosen sense through the
senso r as if you were in its space. As your action, you
can switch between seeing and hearing.
A creature that can see the sensor (such as a creature
benefiting from see invisibility ar truesight) sees a
luminous, intangible orb about the size of your fist.
CLONE

8th-levei necromancy
Casting Time: 1 hour
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (a diamond worth at least 1,000
gp and at least I cubic inch of flesh of the creature
that is to be cloned, which the spell consumes, and a
vessel worth at least 2,000 gp that has a sealable lid
and is large enough to hold a Medium creature, such
as a huge urn, coffin, mud-filled cyst in the ground, ar
crystal container filled with salt water)
Duration: !nstantaneous
This spell grows an inert duplicate of a living creature
as a safeguard against death. This clone forms inside
a sealed vessel and grows to full size and maturity
after 120 days; you can also choose to have the clone
be a younger version of the same creature. lt remains
inert and endures indefinitely, as long as its vessel
remains undisturbed.
At any time after the clone matures, if the original
creature dies, its soul transfers to the clone, provided
that the soul is free and willing to returno The clone is
physically identical to the original and has the same
personality, memories, and abilities, but nane of the
original's equipment. The original creature's physical
remains, if they still exist, become inert and can't
thereafter be restored to life, since the creature's sou I
is elsewhere.

222

PART 3 I SPELLS

CLOUD

OF DAGGERS

2nd-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5, M (a sliver of glass)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Vou fill the air with spinning daggers in a cube 5 feet on
each side, centered on a point you choose within range.
A creature takes 4d4 slashing damage when it enters
the spell's area for the first time on a turn ar starts
its turn there.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd levei ar higher, the damage increases by
2d4 for each slot levei above 2nd.
CLOUDKILL

5th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou create a 20-foot-radius sphere of poisonous, yellowgreen fog centered on a point you choose within range.
The fog spreads around corners. lt lasts for the duration
ar until strong wind disperses the fog, ending the spell.
lts area is heavily obscured.
When a creature enters the spell's area for the first
time on a turn ar starts its turn there, that creature must
make a Constitution saving throw. The creature takes
5d8 poison damage on a failed save, ar half as much
damage on a successful one, Creatures are affected
even if they hold their breath ar don't need to breathe.
The fog moves 10 feet away from you at the start
of each of your turns, rolling along the surface of the
ground. The vapors, being heavier than air, sink to the
lowest levei of the land, even pouring down openings.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 6th level ar higher, the damage increases by
ld8 for each slot levei above 5th.
COLOR SPRAY

I st-/eveJ iIIusion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 5elf (15-foot cone)
Components: V,5, M (a pinch of powder or sand that is
colored red, yellow, and blue)
Duration: I round
A dazzling array of flashing, colored light springs from
your hand. Roll 6dlO; the total is how many hit points
of creatures this spell can effect. Creatures in a 15-foot
cone originating from you are affected in ascending
arder of their current hit points (ignoring unconscious
creatures and creatures that can't see).
5tarting with the creature that has the lowest current
hit points, each creature affected by this spell is blinded
until the spell ends, 5ubtract each creature's hit points
from the total before moving on to the creature with
the next lowest hit points. A creature's hit points must
be equal to or less than the remaining total for that
creature to be affected,

At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, roll an additional 2d IO
for each slot leveI above 1st.
COMMAND
/st-/evel enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: 1 round
Vou speak a one-word command to a creature you can
see within range. The target must succeed on a Wisdom
saving throw or follow the command on its next turno
The spell has no effect if the target is undead, if it
doesn't understand your language, or if your command
is directly harmful to it.
Some typical commands and their effects follow. Vou
might issue a command other than one described here.
If you do so, the OM determines how the target behaves.
If the target can't follow your command, the spell ends.
Approach. The target moves toward you by the
shortest and most direct route, ending its turn if it
moves within 5 feet of YOU.
Drop. The target drops whatever it is holding and then
ends its turno
F/ee. The target spends its turn moving away from
you by the fastest available means.
Grove/. The target falls prone and then ends its turno
Ha/t. The target doesn't move and takes no actions.
A fiying creature stays aloft, provided that it is able to
do sO. If it must move to stay aloft, it fiies the minimum
distance needed to remain in the air.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spell using
a spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, you can affeet one
additional creature for each slot level above 1st. The
creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when
you target them.
COMMUNE
5th-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range:SeIf
Components: V, S, M (incense and aviaI of holy or
unholy water)
Duration: 1 minute
Vou contact your deity or a divine proxy and ask up to
three questions that can be answered with a yes or no.
Vou must ask your questions before the spell ends. Vou
receive a correct answer for each questiono
Oivine beings aren't necessarily omniscient, so you
might receive "unclear" as an answer if a question
pertains to information that lies beyond the deity's
knowledge. In a case where a one-word answer could be
misleading or contrary to the deity's interests, the OM
might offer a short phrase as an answer instead.
Ifyou cast the spell two or more times before finishing
your next long rest, there is a cumulative 25 percent
chance for each casting after the first that you get no
answer. The OM makes this roll in secret.

COMMUNE

WITH NATURE

5th-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 5elf
Components: V, 5
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou briefty become one with nature and gain knowledge
of the surrounding territory. In the outdoors, the spell
gives you knowledge of the land within 3 miles of you.
In caves and other natural underground settings, the
radius is Iimited to 300 feet. The spell doesn't function
where nature has been replaced by construction, such
as in dungeons and towns.
Vou instantly gain knowledge of up to three facts of
your choice about any of the following subjects as they
relate to the area:
terrain and bodies of water
prevalent plants, minerais, animais, or peoples
powerful celestiaIs, fey, fiends, elementals, or undead
influence from other planes of existence
buildings
For example, you could determine the location of
powerful undead in the area, the location of major
sources of safe drinking water, and the location of any
nearby towns.
COMPELLED

DUEL

1st-levei enchantment
Casting Time: I bonus act ion
Range: 30 feet
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vou attempt to compel a creature into a dueI. One
creature that you can see within range must make a
Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is
drawn to you, compelled by your divine demando For
the duration, it has disadvantage on attack rolls against
creatures other than you, and must make a Wisdom
saving throw each time it attempts to move to a space
that is more than 30 feet away from you; if it succeeds
on this saving throw, this spell doesn't restrict the
target's movement for that turno
The spell ends if you attack any other creature, if you
cast a spell that targets a hostile creature other than the
target, if a creature friendly to you damages the target or
casts a harmful spell on it, or ifyou end your turn more
than 30 feet away from the target.
COMPREHEND

LANGUAGES

1st-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 5elf
Components: V, 5, M (a pinch of soot and salt)
Duration: 1 hour
For the duration, you understand the literal meaning of
any spoken language that you hear. Vou also understand
any written language that you see, but you must be
touching the surface on which the words are written. It
takes about I minute to read one page of text.

PAR1 3 I SPELLS

224

This speIl doesn't decode secret messages in a text
or a glyph, such as an arcane sigil, that isn't part of a
written language.
COMPULSION

4th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Creatures of your choice that you can see within range
and that can hear you must make a Wisdom saving
throw. A target automatically succeeds on this saving
throw if it can't be charmed. On a failed save, a target
is affected by this spelI. Until the speIl ends, you can
use a bonus action on each of your turns to designate a
direction that is horizontal to YOU. Each affected target
must use as much of its movement as possible to move
in that direction on its next turno It can take its action
before it moves. After moving in this way, it can make
another Wisdom saving to try to end the effect.
A target isn't compeIled to move into an obviously
deadly hazard, such as a fire or pit, but it will provoke
opportunity attacks to move in the designated direction.
CONE OF COLD

5th-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 5elf (60-foot cone)
Components: V, 5, M (a small crystal or glass cone)
Duration: Instantaneous
A blast of cold air erupts from your hands. Each
creature in a 60-foot cone must make a Constitution
saving throw. A creature takes 8d8 cold damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
A creature killed by this spell becomes a frozen statue
until it thaws.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this speIl using a
spell slot of 6th level or higher, the damage increases by
ld8 for each slot leveI above 5th.
CONFUSION

4th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V, 5, M (three nut shells)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
This spell assaults and twists creatures' minds,
spawning delusions and provoking uncontrolled action.
Each creature in a lO-foot-radius sphere centered on
a point you choose within range must succeed on a
Wisdom saving throw when you cast this spell or be
affected by it.
An affected target can't take reactions and must roIl
adIO at the start of each of its turns to determine its
behavior for that turno

dl0

Behavior

1

The creature
random

uses ali its movement

direction.

To determine

to move in a

the direction,

a d8 and assign

a direction

creature

take an action this turno

doesn't

reli

to each die face. The

2-6

The creature

doesn't

7-8

The creature

uses its action to make a melee attack

against

a randomly

reach.

If there is no creature

creature
9-10

move or take actions

determined

does nothing

The creature

creature

this turno

within its

within its reach, the

this turno

can act and move normally.

At the end of each of its turns, an affected target can
make a Wisdom saving throw. lf it succeeds. this effect
ends for that target.
At Higher LeveIs. When you casl this spell using a
spell slot of 5th levei or higher. the radius of the sphere
increases by 5 reet for each slot levei above 4th.
CONJURE

ANIMALS

3rd-/evel eonjuratioll
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concenlration, up lo 1 hour
Vou summon fey spirits lhal take the form of beasts and
appear in unoccupied spaces that you can see within
range. Choose one of the following options for what
appears:
One beast of challenge rating 2 or lower
Two beasts of challenge rating 1 ar lower
Four beasts of challenge rating 1/2 or lower
Eight beasts of ehallenge rating 1/4 ar lower
Each beasl is also considered fey, and it disappears
when it drops to O hit points or when the spell ends.
The summoned creatures are friendly to you and your
companions. Roll initiative for the summoned creatures
as a group, which has its own turns. They obey any
verbal commands that you issue to them (no action
required by you). If you don't issue any commands to
them, they defend themselves from hostile creatures,
but otherwise take no actions.
The DM has the creatures' statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
certain higher-Ievel spell slots, you choose one of the
summoning options above, and more creatures appear:
twice as many with a 5th-levei slot, three times as many
with a 7th-levei slot. and four times as many with a
9th-levei si 01.
CONJURE

of identical weapons that shoot forward and then
disappear. Each creature in a 60.foot cone must succeed
on a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 3d8
damage on a failed save, ar half as much damage on a
successful one. The damage type is the same as that of
the weapon or ammunition used as a component.

BARRAGE

3rd-/evel conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Sei f (60-foot cone)
Components: V, S, M (one piece of ammunition or a
thrown weapon)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou throw a nonmagical weapon or fire a piece of
nonmagicaI ammunition into the air to create a cone

CONJURE

CELESTIAL

7th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 90 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Vou summon a celestial of challenge rating 4 or lower,
which appears in an unoccupied space that you can see
within range. The celestial disappears when it drops to
O hit points or when the spell ends.
The celestial is friendly to you and your companions
for the duration. Roll initiative for the celestial, which
has its own turns. It obeys any verbal commands that
you issue to it (no action required by you), as long as
they don't violate its alignment. If you don't issue any
commands to the celestial, it defends itself from hostile
creatures but otherwise takes no actions.
The DM has the celestial's statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast [his spell using a
9th-levei spell slot, you summon a celestial of challenge
rating 5 ar lower.
CONJURE

ELEMENTAL

5th-levei cOlljuration
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 90 feet
Components: V, S, M (burning incense for air, soft day
for earth, sulfur and phosphorus for fire, or water and
sand for water)
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
Vou call forth an elemental servant. Choose an area of air,
earth, !ire, or water that fills a lO-foot cube within range.
An elemental of challenge rating 5 or lower appropriate
to the area you chose appears in an unoccupied space
within 10 feet of it. For example, a !ire elemental
emerges from a bonfire, and an earth elemental rises
up fram the ground. The elemental disappears when it
drops to O hit points or when the spell ends.
The elemental is friendly to you and your companions
for the duration. Roll initiative for the elemental, which
has its own turns. lt obeys any verbal commands that
you issue to it (no action required by you). If you don't
issue any commands to the elemental, it defends itself
from hostile creatures but otherwise takes no actions.
Ifyour concentration is broken, the elemental doesn't
disappear. Instead, you lose control of the elemental,
il becomes hostile toward you and your companions,
and it might attack. An uncontrolled elemental can't
be dismissed by you, and it disappears I hour after
you summoned it.
The DM has the elemental's statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the challenge rating
increases by I for each slot levei above 5th.

PART 3

I SPELLS

CONJURE

CONJURE VOLLEY

FEY

6th-levei conjuration

5th-levei conjumtion

Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 90 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 150 feet
Components: V, S, M (one piece of ammunition or one
thrown weapon)
Duration: Instantaneous

Vou summon a fey creatllre of challenge rating 6 or
lower, or a fey spirit that takes the form of a beast of
challenge rating 6 or lower. lt appears in an unoccupied
space that you can see within range, The fey creature
disappears when it drops to O hit points or when
the spell ends,
The fey creature is friendly to you and your
companions for the duration. Roll initiative for the
creature, which has its own turns. lt obeys any verhal
commands that you isslle to it (no action required
by you), as long as they don't violate its alignment. If
you don't issue any commands to the fey creature, it
defends itselffrom hostile creatures but otherwise
takes no actions.
Ifyour concentration is broken, the fey creature
doesn't disappear. Instead, you lose contro! of the
fey creature, it hecomes hostile toward you and your
companions, and it might attack. An uncontrolled fey
creature can't be dismissed hy you. and it disappears 1
hour after you summoned it.
The DM has the fey creature's statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 7th leveI or higher, the challenge rating
increases by 1 for each slot levei above 6th.
CONJURE

MINOR

ELEMENTALS

4th.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 90 feet
Components: V. S
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
Vou summon elementals that appear in IInoccupied
spaces that you can see within range. Vou choose one
the following options for what appears:
One elemental of challenge rating 2 or lower
Two elementals of challenge rating 1 or lower
Four elementals of challenge rating 1/2 or lower
Eight elementals of challenge rating 1/4 or lower.
An elemental summoned by this spell disappears when
it drops to O hit points or when the spell ends.
The summoned creatures are friendly to you and your
companions. Roll initiative for the summoned creatures
as a group. which has its own turns. They obey any
verbal commands that you issue to them (no action
required by you). If you don't issue any commands to
them, they defend themselves from hostile creatures,
hut otherwise take no actions.

The DM has the creatures' statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
certain higher.level spell slots, you choose one of the
summoning options above, and more creatures appear:
twice as many with a 6th-levei slot and three times as
many with an 8th-levei slot.

226

PA RT 3

I SPEl.LS

Vou fire a piece of nonmagical ammunition fram a
ranged weapon or throw a nonmagical weapon into
the air and choose a point within range. Hundreds of
duplicates of the ammunition or weapon fali in a volley
from above and then disappear. Each creature in a
40-foot-radius. 20.foot.high cylinder centered on that
point must make a Dexterity saving throw. A creature
takes 8d8 damage on a failed save. or half as much
damage on a successful one. The damage type is the
same as that of the ammunition or weapon.
CONJURE WOODLAND

BEINGS

4th.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V. S, M (one holly berry per
creature summoned)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Vou summon fey creatures that appear in unoccupied
spaces that you can see within range, Choose one of the
following options for what appears:
One fey creature of challenge rating 2 or lower
Two fey creatures of challenge rating 1 or lower
Four fey creatures of challenge rating 1/2 or lower
Eight fey creatures of challenge rating 1/4 or lower
A summoned creature disappears when it drops to O hit
points or when the spell ends.
The summoned creatures are friend!y to you and your
companions. Roll initiative for the summoned creatures
as a group. which have their own turns. They obey any
verhal commands that you issue to them (no action
required hy you). If you don't issue any commands to
them, they elefend themselves from hostile creatures,
but otherwise take no actions.
The DM has the creatures' statistics.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
certain higher.level spell slots. you choose one of the
summoning options above, anel more creatures appear:
twice as many with a 6th.level slot and three times as
many with an 8th.level slot.
CONTACT

OTHER

PLANE

5th.level divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: 1 minute
Vou mentally contact a demigod, the spirit of a long.dead
sage, or some other mysterious entity fram another
plane. Contacting this extraplanar intelligence can
strain or even break your mind. When you cast this
spell, make a DC 15 lntelligence saving thraw. On a

failure, you take 6d6 psychic damage and are insane
until you finish a long rest. While insane, you can't take
actions, can't understand what other creatures say, can't
read, and speak only in gibberish, A greater restoration
spell cast on you ends this effect.
On a successful save, you can ask the entity up to five
questions, Vou must ask your questions before the spell
ends, The DM answers each question with one word,
such as uyes," "no," "maybe," "never/' "irrelevant." ar
"unclear" (if the entity doesn't know the answer to the
question), ]f a one-word answer would be misleading,
the DM might instead offer a short phrase as an answer,
CONTAGION

5th-leveI necromancy
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Component: V, S
Duration: 7 days
Your touch inflicts disease. Make a melee spell atlack
against a creature within your reach. On a hit, you aftlict
the creature with a disease of your choice from any of
the ones described below.
At the end of each of the target's turns, it must make
a Constitution saving throw. After failing three of
these saving throws, the disease's effects last for the
duration, and the creature stops making these saves.
After succeeding on three of these saving throws, the
creature recovers from the disease, and the spell ends.
Since this spell induces a natural disease in its
target, any effect that removes a disease or otherwise
ameliorates a disease's effects apply to it.
Blinding Sickness. Pain grips the creature's mind,
and its eyes turn milky white. The creature has
disadvantage on Wisdom checks and Wisdom saving
throws and is blinded,
FiJth Fever. A raging fever sweeps through the
creature's body. The creature has disadvantage on
Strength checks, Strength saving throws. and attack
rolls that use Strength.
Flesh Rot. The creature's flesh decays. The creature
has disadvantage on Charisma checks and vulnerability
to ali damage.
Mindfire. The creature's mind becomes feverish. The
creature has disadvantage on Intelligcnce checks and
Intelligence saving throws, and the creature behaves as
if under the effects of the confusion spell during combat.
Seizure. The creature is ovcrcomc with shaking.
The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity checks,
Dcxterity saving throws, and attack rolls that
use Dexterity.
Slimy Doom. The creaturc begins to bleed
uncontrollably. The creature has disadvantagc on
Constitution checks and Constitution saving throws.
In addition, whenever the creature takcs damage, it is
stunned until the end of its next turno
CONTINGENCY

6th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: Self

Components: V, S, M (a statuetle of yourself carved
from ivory and decorated with gems worth at
least 1,500 gp)
Duration: 10 days
Choose a spell of 5th levei or lower that you can cast, that
has a casting time of 1 action, and that can target YOU.
Vou cast that spell-called the contingent spell-as part
of casting contingency, expending spell slots for both, but
the contingent spell doesn't come into effect. Instead, it
takes effect when a certain circumstance occurs. Vou
describe that circumstance when you cast the two spells.
For example, a contingency cast with water breathing
might stipulate that water breathing comes into effect
when you are engulfed in water or a similar liquid.
The contingent spell takes effect immediately after thc
circumstance is met for the first time, whether or not you
want it to, and then contingencyends.
The contingent spell takes effect only on you, even
if it can normally target others. Vou can use only one
contingency spell at a time. If you cast this spell again,
the effect of another contingency spell on you ends. Also,
contingency ends on you if its material component is
ever not on your person.
CONTINUAL

FLAME

2nd./evel evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (ruby dust worth 50 gp, which the
spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled
A flame, equivalent in brightness to a torch, springs
forth from an object that you touch. The cffect looks like
a regular flame, hut it creates no heat and doesn't use
oxygen. A continuaI liame can be covered or hidden but
not smothered or quenched.
CONTROL WATER

4th-leveI transnllltation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 300 fect
Components: V, S, M (a drop ofwater and a
pinch of dust)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Until the spell cnds, you control any frcestanding water
inside an arca you choose that is a cube up to 100 feet
on a side. Vou can choose from any of the following
effccts when you cast this spcll. As an action on your
turn, you can rcpeat the same effect or choosc a
different one.
Flood. Vou cause the water Icvel of ali standing water in
the area to rise by as much as 20 feet. If the area includes
a shore, the flooding water spills over onto dry land.
If you choose an area in a large body of water. you
instead create a 20-foot tall wave that travels from one
side of the area to the other and then crashes down. Any
Huge or smaller vehiclcs in the wave's path are carried
with it lo the other side. Any Huge or smaller vehicles
struck by the wave have a 25 percent chance of capsizing.
The water levei remains elevated until the spell ends
or you choose a different effect. Ifthis effect produced
PART 3

SPEI L~

227

a wave, the wave repeats on the start of your next turn
while the fiood effect lasts.
Part Water. Vou cause water in the area to move
aparl and creale a lrench. The trench extends across
the spell's area, and the separaled waler forms a wall lo
either side. The lrench remains unlil lhe spell ends or
you choose a different effect. The waler lhen slowly fills
in lhe trench over lhe course of the next round until the
normal water levei is restored.
Redirect FIow. Vou cause fiowing water in the area
to move in a direction you choose, even if the water has
to fiow over obstacles, up walls, or in other unlikely
directions. The water in the area moves as you direct
it, but once it moves beyond the spell's area, it resumes
its fiow based on the terrain conditions. The water
continues to move in the direction you chose until the
spell ends or you choose a different effect.
WhirIpooI. This effect requires a body of water
at least 50 feet square and 25 feet deep. Vou cause
a whirlpool to form in the center of the area. The
whirlpool forms a vortex that is 5 feet wide at the
base, up to 50 feet wide ai the top, and 25 feel tall. Any
creature or object in the water and within 25 feet of the
vortex is pulled 10 feet toward it. A creature can swim
away from the vortex by making a Strength (Athletics)
check against your spell save DC.
When a creature enters the vortex for the first time on
a turn or starts its turn there, it must make a Strength
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 2d8
bludgeoning damage and is caught in the vortex until
the spell ends. On a successful save, the creature takes
half damage, and isn't caught in the vortex. A crealure
caught in the vortex can use its action to try to swim
away from the vortex as described above, but has
disadvanlage on lhe Strength (Athletics) check to do so.
The first time each turn that an object enters the
vortex, the object takes 2d8 bludgeoning damage; this
damage occurs each round it remains in the vortex.
CONTROL

WEATHER

8th.level transmutation
Casting Time: lO minutes
Range: Self (5-mile radius)
Components: V, S, M (burning incense and bits of earth
and wood mixed in water)
Duration: Concentration, up to 8 hours
Vou take control of the weather within 5 miles of you
for the duration. Vou must be outdoors to cast this spell.
Moving to a place where you don't have a clear path to
the sky ends the spell early.
When you cast the spell, you change the current
weather conditions, which are determined by the DM
based on the climate and season. Vou can change
precipitation, temperature, and wind. lt takes Id4 x 10
minutes for the new conditions lO take effect. Once they
do so. you can change the conditions again. When the
spell ends, the weather gradually returns to normal.
When you change the weather conditions, find a
current condition on the following tables and change its
stage by one, up or down. When changing the wind, you
can change its direction.

228

PART 3 I SPELLS

PRECIPITATION

Stage

Condition

1
2
3
4

Clear
Light clouds
Overcast or ground fog
Rain, hail, or snow

5

Torrential

rain, driving hail, or blizzard

TEMPERATURE

Stage

Condition

1

Unbearable

2

Hot

WIND

heat

Stage

Condition

1
2

Calm
Moderate

Strong wind

3

Warm

3

4

Cool

4

Gale

5
6

Cold
Arctic cold

5

Storm

CORDON

wind

OF ARROWS

2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 5 feet
Components: V, S, M (four or more arrows or bolts)
Duration: 8 hours
Vou plant four pieces of nonmagical ammunitionarrows or crossbow bolts-in the ground within range
and lay magic upon them to protect an area. Until the
spell ends, whenever a creature other than you comes
within 30 feet of the ammunition for the first time on a
turn or ends its turn there, one piece of ammunition fiies
up to strike it. The creature must succeed on a Dexterity
saving throw or take Id6 piercing damage. The piece of
ammunition is then destroyed. The spell ends when no
ammunition remains.
When you cast this spell, you can designate any
creatures you choose, and the spell ignores them.
At Hil1her LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the amount of
ammunition that can be affected increases by two for
each slot levei above 2nd.
COUNTERSPELL

3rd.level abjuration
Casting Time: I reaction, which you take when you see
a creature within 60 feet of you casting a spell
Range: 60 feet
Components: S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou altempt to interrupt a creature in the process of
casting a spell. lf the creature is casting a spell of 3rd
levei or lower, its spell fails and has no effect. lf it is
casting a spell of 4th leveI or higher, make an ability
check using your spellcasting ability. The DC equals 10
+ the spell's leveI. On a success, the creature's spell fails
and has no effect.
At Hil1her LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the interrupted spell has
no effect if its levei is less than or equal to the levei of the
spell slot you used.

CREATE

FOOD AND WATER

3rd-Ievel conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou create 45 pounds of food and 30 gallons of water
on the ground or in containers within range, enough
to sustain up to tifteen humanoids or tive steeds for
24 hours. The food is bland but nourishing, and spoils
if uneaten after 24 hours. The water is clean and
doesn't go bad.
CREATE

OR DESTROY WATER

24 hours, you must cast this spell on the creature
before the current 24-hour period ends. This use
of the spell reasserts your control over up to three
creatures you have animated with this spell, rather than
animating new ones.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
7th-leveI spell slot, you can animate or reassert control
over four ghouls. When you cast this spellusing an
8th-leveI spell slot, you can animate or reassert control
over tive ghouls or two ghasts or wights. When you cast
this spell using a 9th-leveI spell slot, you can animate or
reassert control over six ghouls, three ghasts or wights,
or two mummies.
CREATION

1st-leveI transmutation

5th-levei il/usion

Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (a drop of water if creating water
or a few grains of sand if destroying it)
Duration: Instantaneous

Casting Time: I minute
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (a tiny piece of matter of the same
type of the item you plan to create)
Duration: Special

Vou either create or destroy water.
Create Water. Vou create up to 10 gallons of clean
water within range in an open container. Alternatively,
the water falls as rain in a 30-foot cube within range,
extinguishing exposed fiames in the area.
Destroy Water. Vou destroy up to 10 gallons of water
in an open container within range. Alternatively, you
destroy fog in a 30-foot cube within range.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, you create or destroy
10 additional gallons of water, or the size of the cube
increases by 5 feet, for each slot leveI above 1st.

Vou pull wisps of shadow material from the Shadowfell
to create a nonliving object of vegetable matter within
range: 50ft goods. rope, wood, or something similar. Vou
can also use this spell to create mineral objects such as
stone, crystal, or metal. The object created must be no
larger than a 5-foot cube, and the object must be of a
form and material that you have seen before.
The duration depends on the object"s material. If
the object is composed of multiple materiaIs, use the
shortest duration.
Material

Duration

1 day

UNDEAD

Vegetable matter
Stone ar crystal

6th-leveI necromancy

Precious metais

CREATE

Casting Time: I minute
Range: 10 feet
Components: V, S, M (one clay pot tilled with grave dirt.
one clay pot tilled with brackish water, and one 150 gp
black onyx stone for each corpse)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou can cast this spell only at nighl. Choose up to three
corpses of Medium or Small humanoids within range.
Each corpse becomes a ghoul under your control. (The
DM has game statistics for these creatures.)
As a bonus action on each of your turns, you can
mentally command any creature you animated with
this spell ifthe creature is within 120 feet ofyou (ifyou
control multiple creatures, you can command any or ali
of them at the same time, issuing the same command to
each one). Vou decide what action the creature will take
and where it will move during its next turn, or you can
issue a general command, such as to guard a particular
chamber or corridor. If you issue no commands, the
creature only defends itself against hostile creatures.
Once given an order, the creature continues to follow it
until its task is complete.
The creaturc is under your control for 24 hours,
after which it stops obeying any command you have
given il. To maintain control of the creature for another

Gems
Adamantine

ar mithral

12 hours
1 hour
la minutes
1 minute

Using any material created by this spell as another
spell's material component causes that spell to fail.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the cube increases by 5
feet for each slot leveI above 5th.
CROWN

OF MADNESS

2nd-leveI enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
One humanoid of your choice that you can see within
range must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or
become charmed by you for the duration. While
the target is charmed in this way, a twisted crown
of jagged iron appears on its head, and a madness
glows in its eyes.
The charmed target must use its action before moving
on each of its turns to make a melee attack against a
creature other than itself that you mentally choose.

PART 3

SPELLS

229

The target can act normally on its turn if you choose no
creature or if none are within its reach.
On your subsequent turns, you must use your action to
maintain control over the target, or the spell ends. AIso,
the target can make a Wisdom saving throw at the end
of each of its turns. On a success. the spell ends.
CRUSADER'S

MANTLE

3rd-Ievel evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute

DARKVISION

2nd-levei transmutation

Holy power radiates from you in an aura with a 30-foot
radius, awakening boldness in friendly creatures. Until
the spell ends, the aura moves with you, centered on
you. While in the aura, each nonhostile creature in the
aura (including you) deals an extra Id4 radiant damage
when it hits with a weapon attack.

Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V. S, M (either a pinch of dried
carrot or an agate)
Duration: 8 hours

CURE WOUNDS

Vou touch a willing creature to grant it the ability to
see in the dark. For the duration. that creature has
darkvision out to a range of 60 feel.

1st-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
A creature you touch regains a number of hit points
equal to Id8 + your spellcasting ability modifier. This
spell has no effect on undead or constructs.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the healing increases by
Id8 for each slot leveI above I sI.
DANCING

LIGHTS

Evocation cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a bit of phosphorus or wychwood,
or a glowworm)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vou create up to four torch-sized lights within range,
making them appear as torches, lanterns, or glowing
orbs that hover in the air for the duration. Vou can
also combine the four Iights into one glowing vaguely
humanoid form of Medium size. Whichever form you
choose, each light sheds dim light in a lO-foot radius.
As a bonus action on your turn, you can move the
lights up to 60 feet to a new spot within range. A Iight
must be within 20 feet of another light created by this
spell, and a light winks out if it exceeds the spell's range.
DARKNESS

2nd-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, M (bat fur and a drop of pitch or
piece of coai)
Duration: Concentration, up to lO minutes
Magical darkness spreads from a point you choose
within range to fill a IS-foot-radius sphere for the
PART 3
230

duration. The darkness spreads around corners.
A creature with darkvision can't see through this
darkness, and nonmagical light can't illuminate il.
If the point you choose is on an object you are holding
or one that isn't being worn or carried, the darkness
emanates from the object and moves with il. Completely
covering the source of the darkness with an opaque
object, such as a bowl or a heIm, blocks the darkness.
]f any of this spell's area overlaps with an area of light
created by a spell of 2nd levei or lower, the spell that
created the light is dispelled.

I SPELLS

DAYLIGHT

3rd-Ievel evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: I hour
A 60-foot-radius sphere of light spreads out from a point
you choose within range. The sphere is bright light and
sheds dim light for an additional 60 feel.
]f you chose a point on an object you are holding or
one that isn't being worn or carried, the light shines
from the object and moves with it. Completely covering
the affected object with an opaque object, such as a bowl
or a helm, blocks the light.
If any of this spell's area overlaps with an area of
darkness created by a spell of 3rd levei or lower, the
spell that created the darkness is dispelled.
DEATH WARD

4th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: 8 hours
Vou touch a creature and grant it a measure of
protection from death.
The first time the target would drop to O hit points as a
result of taking damage, the target instead drops to I hit
point, and the spell ends.
If the spell is still in effect when the target is subjected
to an effect lhat would kill it instantaneously without
dealing damage, that effect is instead negated against
the target, and the spell ends.
DELAYED BLAST FIREBALL

7th-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action

Range: ISO feel
Components: V, S, M (a liny ball of bal
guano and sulfur)
Duralion: Concenlralion, up lO I minule
A beam of yellow lighl lIashes from your poinling finger,
then condenses lo linger aI a chosen poinl wilhin range
as a glowing bead for the duralion. When lhe spell
ends, either beca use your concentration is broken OI'
because you decide to end it, lhe bead blossoms with a
low roar inlo an explosion of liame Ihal spreads around
corners. Each crealure in a 20.fool.radius sphere
centered on that point must make a Dexterity saving
throw. A crealure lakes fire damage equal to lhe total
accumulated damage on a failed save, OI'half as much
damage on a successful one.
The spell's base damage is 12d6. If at the end of
your lurn lhe bead has not yet detonated, lhe damage
increases by Id6.
]f the glowing bead is touched before the interval
has expired, lhe creature touching it must make a
Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the spell ends
immediately, causing the bead 10 erupt in liame. On a
successful save, the crealure can throw the bead up to
40 fee!. When it strikes a creature 01' a solid objecl, the
spell ends, and lhe bead explodes.
The fire damages objecls in the area and ignites
lIammable objecls that aren'l being worn OI'carried.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 8th leveI OI'higher, lhe base damage
increases by Id6 for each sI01 leveI above 71h.
DEMIPLANE

8th./evel conjuratian
Casling Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: S
Duralion: I hour
Vou create a shadowy door on a lIat solid surface that
you can see within range. The door is large enough to
allow Medium creatures lo pass through unhindered.
When opened, lhe door leads lo a demiplane Ihat
appears to be an empty room 30 feet in each dimension,
made of wood 01' stone. When the spell ends, the door
disappears, and any crealures 01' objects inside the
demiplane remain trapped Ihere, as lhe door also
disappears from the olheI' side.
Each time you casl this spell, you can create a new
demiplane, OI'have the shadowy doar connect to a
demiplane you created with a previous casting of this
spell. Additionally, if you know the nature and contents
of a demiplane created bya casting of this spell by
another creature, you can have lhe shadowy door
connecl to its demiplane inslead.
DESTRUCTIVE

Vou slrike the ground, creating a burst of divine
energy that ripples oulward ftom you. Each creature
you choose within 30 feet of you must succeed on a
Conslitution saving throw OI'take 5d6 thunder damage,
as well as 5d6 radiant OI'necrotic damage (your choice),
and be knocked prone. A creature that succeeds on
its saving throw takes half as much damage and isn't
knocked prone.
DETECT EVIL ANO Gooo

1st-IeveI divination
Casting Time: I aclion
Range:Se]f
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
For the duralion, you know if Ihere is an aberration,
celestial, elemenlal, fey, fiend, OI'undead within 30
feet of you, as well as where lhe crealure is located.
Similarly, you know if there is a place 01' object within
30 feet of you Ihat has been magically consecrated
OI'desecrated.
The spell can penetrate most barriers, but it is blocked
by I fool of slone, I inch of common metal, a thin sheel
of lead, OI'3 feel of wood OI'dir!.
DETECT MAGIC

1st-leveI divination (ritual)
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
For the duration, you sense the presence of magic
wilhin 30 feet of you. ]f you sense magic in Ihis way, you
can use your action to see a faint aura around any visible
creature OI'object in the area that bears magic, and you
learn its school of magic. if any.
The spell can penetrate most barriers, but it is blocked
by I foot of slone, I inch of common metal, a Ihin sheel
of lead, OI'3 feet of wood OI'di r!.
DETECT POISON ANO DISEASE

1st-leveI divination (ritual)
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V, S, M (a yew leaf)
Duration: Concenlration, up to 10 minutes
For the duration, you can sense the presence and
location of poisons, poisonous creatures, and diseases
within 30 feel of you. Vou also identify the kind of
poison, poisonous creature, ar disease in each case.

The spell can penelrate most barriers, but it is blocked
by I foot of slone, I inch of common metal, a thin sheet
of lead, OI'3 feet of wood OI'dir!.

WAVE

5thJevelevocation
Casling Time: I action
Range: Self (30-foot radius)
Componenls: V
Duration: Inslantaneous

DETECT THOUGHTS

2nd.level divination
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V, S, M (a copper piece)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute

PART 3

SPELLS

231

For the duration, you can read the thoughts of certain
creatures, When you cast the spell and as your action on
each turn until the spell ends, you can focus your mind
on any one creature that you can see within 30 feet of
you, If the creature you choose has an Intelligence of
3 or lower or doesn't speak any language, the crealure
is unaffected.
Vou initially learn the surface thoughts of the
creature-what
is most on its mind in that moment. As
an action, you can either shift your atlention lo another
creature's thoughts or atlempt to probe deeper into the
same creature's mind. ]f you probe deeper, the target
must make a Wisdom saving throw. If it fails, you gain
insight into its reasoning (if any), its emotional state,
and something that looms large in ils mind (such as
something it worries over, loves, or hates). ]f it succeeds,
the spell ends. Either way, the target knows that you are
probing into its mind, and unless you shift your atlention
to another creature's thoughts, the creature can use
its action on its turn to make an lntelligence check
contested by your Intelligence check; if it succeeds,
the spell ends.
Questions verbally directed at the target creature
naturally shape the course of its thoughts, so this spell
is particularly effective as part of an interrogation.
Vou can also use this spell to detect the presence of
thinking creatures you can't see. When you cast the
spell or as your action during the duration, you can
search for thoughts within 30 feet of YOU.The spell can
penetrate barriers, but 2 feet of rock, 2 inches of any
metal other than lead, or a thin sheet of lead blocks you.
Vou can't detect a creature with an lntelligence of 3 or
lower or one that doesn't speak any language.
Once you de tecI the presence of a creature in this way,
you can read its lhoughts for the rest of the duration as
described above, even if you can't see it, but it must still
be within range.
DIMENSION

DOOR

4th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 500 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou teleport yourself from your current location lo any
other spot within range. Vou arrive at exactly the spot
desired. It can be a place you can see, one you can
visualize, or one you can describe by stating distance
and direclion, such as "200 feet straight downward" or
"upward to the northwest at a 45-degree angle, 300 feet."
Vou can bring along objects as long as their weight
doesn't exceed what you can carry. Vou can also bring
one willing creature of your size or smaller who is
carrying gear up to its carrying capacity. The creature
must be within 5 feet of you when you cast this spell.
If you would arrive in a place already occupied byan
object or a creature, you and any creature traveling with
you each take 4d6 force damage, and the spell fails to
teleport you.

DISGUISE

SELF

1st-levei
, iIIusion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V, S
Duration: 1 hour
Vou make yourself-including your clothing, armor,
weapons, and other belongings on your person-Iook
different until the spell ends ar until you use your action
to dismiss it. Vou can seem 1 foot shorter or taller and
can appear thin, fat, or in belween. Vou can't change
your body type, so you must adopt a form that has the
same basic arrangement of limbs. Otherwise, the extent
of the illusion is up to you.
The changes wrought by this spell fail to hold up lo
physical inspection. For example, if you use this spell
to add a hat to your oUlfit, objects pass through the hat,
and anyone who touches it would feel nothing or would
feel your head and hair. If you use this spell to appear
thinner than you are, lhe hand of someone who reaches
out lOtouch you would bump into you while it was
seemingly still in midair.
To discern that you are disguised, a creature can use
its action to inspect your appearance and must succeed
on an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your
spell save De.
DISINTEGRATE

6th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S, M (a lodestone and a pinch of dust)
Duration: lnstantaneous
A thin green ray springs from your pointing finger to a
target that you can see within range. The target can be a
creature, an objecl, or a creation of magical force, such
as the wall created by wall of force.
A creature targeted by this spell must make a
Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the target takes
IOd6 + 40 force damage. If lhis damage reduces the
target to O hit points, it is disintegrated.
A disintegrated creature and everything il is wearing
and carrying, except magic ilems, are reduced to a pile
of fine gray dust. The creature can be restored to life
only by means of a true resurrection or a wish spell.
This spell automatically disintegrates a Large or
smaller nonmagical object or a creation of magical
force. ]f the target is a Huge or larger object or creation
of force, this spell disintegrates a lO-foot-cube portion of
it. A magic item is unaffecled by this spell.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 7th leveI or higher, the damage increases by
3d6 for each slot levei above 6th.
DISPEL EVIL AND GOOD

5th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: SeI f

PAR r 3

SPELL

Components: V, S, M (holy water or powdered
silver and iron)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute

DIVINATION

4th-levei divination (ritual)

Shimmering energy surrounds and protects you from
fey, undead, and creatures originating from beyond the
Material Plane. For the duration, celestiais, elementals,
fey, fiends, and undead have disadvantage on attack
rolls against you.
Vou can end the spell early by using either of the
following special functions.
Break Enchantment. As your action, you touch a
creature you can reach that is charmed, frightened, or
possessed bya celestial, an elemental, a fey, a fiend,
or an undead. The creature you touch is no longer
charmed, frightened, or possessed by such creatures.
DismissaI. As your action, make a melee spell attack
against a celestial, an elemental, a fey, a fiend, or an
undead you can reach. On a hit, you attempt to drive
the creature back to its home plane. The creature must
succeed on a Charisma saving throw or be sent back to
its home plane (if it isn't there already). If they aren't on
their home plane, undead are sent to the Shadowfell,
and fey are sent to the Feywild.
DISPEL MAGIe

Choose one creature, object, or magical effect within
range. Any spell of 3rd levei or lower on the target ends.
For each spell of 4th levei or higher on the target. make
an ability check using your spellcasting ability. The
DC equals 10 + the spell's leveI. On a successful check,
the spell ends.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 4th level or higher, you automatically end
the effec!s of a spell on the target if the spell's levei is
equal to or less than the levei of the spell slot you used.
DISSONANT WHISPERS

1st-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous

dangerous

ground,

such

as a fire or a pit. On a successful save, the target takes
half as much damage and doesn't have to move away. A
deafened creature automatically succeeds on the save.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd level or higher. the damage increases by
Id6 for each slot levei above 1st.

3

SPELLS

FAVOR

Your prayer empowers you with divine radiance. Until
the spell ends, your weapon attacks deal an extra 1d4
radiant damage on a hit.
DIVINE WORD

7th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: 30 fee!
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
You utter a divine word, imbued with the power thar
shaped the world at the dawn of ereation. Choose any
number of creatures you can see within range. Each
creature that can hear you must make a Charisma
saving throw. On a failed save, a creature suffers an
effect based on its current hit points:
50 hit points or fewer: deafened for 1 minute
40 hit points or fewer: deafened and blinded for 10

Vou whisper a discordam melody that only one creature
of your choice within range can hear, wracking it with
terrible pain. The target must make a Wisdom saving
throw. On a failed save, it takes 3d6 psychic damage and
must immediately use its reaction, if available, to move
as far as its speed allows away from you. The creature

P"Rf

DIVINE

Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous

234

Your magic and an offering put you in contact with
a god or a god's servants. Vou ask a single question
concerning a speeific goal, event, or activity to occur
within 7 days. The DM offers a truthful reply. The reply
might be a short phrase, a cryptic rhyme, or an omen.
The spell doesn't take into account any possible
circumstances that might change the outcome, such
as the casting of additional spells or the loss or gain
of a companion.
If you cast the spell two or more times before finishing
your next long rest, there is a cumulative 25 percent
chance for each casting after the first that you get a
random reading. The DM makes this roll in secret.

1st-Ievel evocarion

3rd-Ievel abjuration

doesn't Inove into obviously

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V, S, M (incense and a sacrifieial offering
appropriate to your religion, together worth at least 25
gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous

minutes

30 hit points ar fewer: blinded, deafened, and stunned
for 1 hour
20 hit points or fewer: killed instantly
Regardless of its current hit points, a celestial, an
elemental, a fey. or a fiend that fails its save is forced
back to its plane of origin (if it isn't there already) and
can't return to your current plane for 24 hours byany
means short of a wish spell.
DOMINATE BEAST

4th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1 action

Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vou attempt to beguile a beast that you can see within
range. lt must succeed on a Wisdom saving thraw or be
charmed by you for the duration. ]f you or creatures that
are friendly to you are fighting it, it has advantage on the
saving thraw.
While the beast is charmed, you have a telepathic link
with it as long as the two of you are on the same plane
of existence. Vou can use this telepathic link to issue
commands to the creature while you are conscious (no
action required), which it does its best to obey. Vou can
specifya simple and general course of action, such as
"Attack that creature." "Run over there," or "Fetch that
objec!." If the creature completes the order and doesn't
receive further direction from you, it defends and
preserves itself to the best of its ability.
Vou can use your action to take total and precise
contraI of the targe!. Until the end of your next turn, the
creature takes only the actions you choose, and doesn't
do anything that you don't allow it to do. During this
time, you can also cause the creature to use a reaction,
but this requires you to use your own reaction as well.
Each time the target takes damage, it makes a new
Wisdom saving thraw against the spell. ]f the saving
throw succeeds, the spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell with a
5th.level spell slot, the duration is concentration, up
to 10 minutes. When you use a 6th.level spell slot,
the duration is concentration, up to I hour. When you
use a spell slot of 7th levei or higher, the duration is
concentration, up to 8 hours.
DOMINATE

MONSTER

8th.level enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
Vou attempt to beguile a creature that you can see
within range. lt must succeed on a Wisdom saving
throw or be charmed by you for the duration. If you or
creatures that are friendly to you are fighting it, it has
advantage on the saving throw.
While the creature is charmed, you have a telepathic
link with it as long as the two of you are on the same
plane of existence. Vou can use this telepathic link to
issue commands to the creature while you are conscious
(no action required), which it does its best to obey. Vou
can specify a simple and general course of action, such
as "Attack that creature," "Run over there," or "Fetch
that object." If the creature completes the order and
doesn't receive further direction from you, it defends
and preserves itself to the best of its ability.
Vou can use your action to take total and precise
contraI of the targe!. Until the end of your next turn, the
creature takes only the actions you choose, and doesn't
do anything that you don't allow it to do. During this
time, you can also cause the creature to use a reaction,
but this requires you to use your own reaction as well.

Each time the target takes damage, it makes a new
Wisdom saving throw against the spell. If the saving
throw succeeds, the spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell with
a 9th.level spell slot, the duration is concentration,
up to 8 hours.
DOMINATE

PERSON

5th.level enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vou attempt to beguile a humanoid that you can see
within range. lt must succeed on a Wisdom saving
throw or be charmed by you for the duration. If you or
creatures that are friendly to you are fighting it, it has
advantage on the saving throw.
While the target is charmed, you have a telepathic link
with it as long as the two of you are on the same plane
of existence. Vou can use this telepathic link to issue
commands to the creature while you are conscious (no
action required), which it does its best to obey. Vou can
specify a simple and general course of action, such as
"Attack that creature," "Run over there," or "Fetch that
object." If the creature completes the order and doesn't
receive further direction from you, it defends and
preserves itself to the best of its ability.
Vou can use your action to take total and precise
contrai of the targe!. Until the end of your next turn, the
creature takes only the actions you choose, and doesn't
do anything that you don't allow it to do. During this
time you can also cause the creature to use a reaction,
but this requires you to use your own reaction as well.
Each time the target takes damage, it makes a new
Wisdom saving throw against the spell. If the saving
throw succeeds, the spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using
a 6th.level spell slot, the duration is concentration,
up to 10 minutes. When you use a 7th.level spell slot,
the duration is concentration, up to I hour. When you
use a spell slot of 8th levei or higher, the duration is
concentration, up to 8 hours.
DRAWMIJ'S

INSTANT

SUMMONS

6th.level conjuration (ritual)
Casting Time: I minute
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (a sapphire worth 1,000 gp)
Duration: Until dispelled
Vou touch an object weighing 10 pounds or less whose
longest dimension is 6 feet or less. The spellleaves an
invisible mark on its surface and invisibly inscribes the
na me of the item on the sapphire you use as the material
componen!. Each time you cast this spell, you must use
a different sapphire.
At any time thereafter, you can use your action to
speak the item's name and crush the sapphire. The item
instantly appears in your hand regardless of physical or
planar distances, and the spell ends.

PART

3

SPELLS

235

]f another creature is holding or carrying the item,
crushing the sapphire doesn't transport the item to you,
but instead you learn who the creature possessing the
object is and roughly where that creature is located
at that moment.
Dispel magic or a similar effect successfully applied to
the sapphire ends this spell's effect.
DREAM

5th-leveI iIIusion
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 5pecial
Components: V, 5, M (a handful of sand, a dab of ink,
and a writing quill plucked from a sleeping bird)
Duration: 8 hours
This spell shapes a creature's dreams. Choose a
creature known to you as the target of this spell. The
target must be on the same plane of existence as you.
Creatures that don't sleep, such as elves, can't be
contacted by this spell. Vou, or a willing creature you
touch, enlers a trance state, acting as a messenger.
While in the trance, the messenger is aware of his or
her surroundings, but can't take actions or move.
If the target is asleep, the messenger appears in the
target's dreams and can converse with the target as
long as it remains asleep, through the duration of the
spell. The messenger can also shape the environment
of the dream, creating landscapes. objects, and other
images. The messenger can emerge from the trance at
any time, ending the effect of the spell early. The target
recalls the dream perfectly upon waking. If the target is
awake when you cast the spell, the messenger knows it,
and can either end the trance (and the spell) or wait for
the target to fali asleep, at which point the messenger
appears in the target's dreams.
Vou can make the messenger appear monstrous
and terrifying to the target. If you do, the messenger
can deliver a message of no more than ten words and
then the target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On
a failed save, echoes of the phantasmal monstrosity
spawn a nightmare that lasts the duration of the target's
sleep and prevents the target from gaining any benefit
from that rest. In addition, when the target wakes up, it
takes 3d6 psychic damage.
If you have a body part, lock of hair, c1ipping from a
nail, or similar portion of the target's body, the target
makes its saving throw with disadvantage.
DRUIDCRAFT

Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Instantaneous
Whispering to the spirits of nature, you create one of the
following effects within range:
Vou create a tiny, harmless sensory effect that predicts
what the weather will be at your location for the next
24 hours. The effect might manifest as a golden orb

PA RT 3

I SPELI.S

for c1ear skies, a c10ud for rain, falling snowflakes for
snow, and so on. This effect persists for I round.
Vou instantly make a flower blossom, a seed pod open,
or a leaf bud bloom.
Vou create an instantaneous, harmless sensory effect,
such as falling leaves, a puff of wind, the sound of a
small animal, or the faint odor of skunk. The effect
must fit in a 5-foot cube.
Vou instantly light or snuff out a candle, a torch, or a
small campfire.
EARTHQUAKE

8th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 500 feet
Components: V, 5, M (a pinch of dirl, a piece of rock,
and a lump of c1ay)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vou create a seismic disturbance at a point on the
ground that you can see within range. For the duration,
an intense tremor rips through the ground in a
100-foot-radius circ1e centered on that point and shakes
creatures and structures in contact with the ground
in that area.
The ground in the area becomes difficult terrain.
Each creature on the ground that is concentrating must
make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the
creature's concentration is broken.
When you cast this spell and at the end of each turn
you spend concentrating on it, each creature on the
ground in the area must make a Dexterity saving throw.
On a failed save, the creature is knocked prone.
This spell can have additional effects depending on
the terra in in the area, as determined by the DM.
Fissures. Fissures open throughout the spell's area at
the start of your next turn after you cast the spell. A total
of Id6 such fissures open in locations chosen by the DM.
Each is IdlO x 10 feet deep, la feet wide, and extends
from one edge of the spell's area to the opposite side.
A creature standing on a spot where a fissure opens
must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or fali in. A
creature that sllccessfully saves moves with the fissure's
edge as it opens.
A fissure that opens beneath a structure causes it to
automatically collapse (see below).
Structures. The tremor deals 50 bludgeoning damage
to any structure in contact with the ground in the area
when you cast the spell and at the start of each of your
turns until the spell ends. ]f a structure drops to Ohit
points, it collapses and potentially damages nearby
creatures. A crealure within half the distance of a
structure's height must make a Dexterity saving throw.
On a failed save, the creature takes 5d6 bludgeoning
damage, is knocked prone, and is buried in the rubble,
requiring a DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check as an
action to escape. The DM can adjust the DC higher
or lower, depending on the nalure of the rubble. On
a successful save, the creature takes half as much
damage and doesn't fali prone or become buried.

ELDRITCH

BLAST

ENLARGE/REDUCE

Evocation cantrip

2nd-leveI transmutation

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,5
Duration: lnstantaneous

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,5, M (a pinch of powdered iron)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute

A beam of crackling energy streaks toward a creature
within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the
target. On a hit, the target takes ldlO force damage.
The spell creates more than one beam when you reach
higher leveis: two beams at 5th levei, three beams at
11th levei, and four beams at 17th leveI. Vou can direct
the beams at the same target or at different ones. Make
a separate attack roll for each beam.

Vou cause a creature or an object you can see within
range to grow larger or smaller for the duration. Choose
either a creature ar an object that is neither worn
nor carried. If the target is unwilling, it can make a
Constitution saving throw. On a success, the spell
has no effect.
If the target is a creature, everything it is wearing and
carrying changes size with it. Any item dropped byan
affected creature returns to normal size at once.
Enlarge. The target's size doubles in ali dimensions,
and its weight is multiplied by eight. This growth
increases its size by one category-from Medium to
Large, for example. If there isn't enough room for the
target to double its size. the creature or object attains
the maximum possible size in the space available.
Until the spell ends, the target also has advantage on
5trength checks and 5trength saving throws. The
target's weapons also grow to match its new size. While
these weapons are enlarged, the target's attacks with
them deal ld4 extra damage.
Reduce. The target's size is halved in ali dimensions,
and its weight is reduced to one-eighth of normal. This
reduction decreases its size by one category-from
Medium to 5mall, for example. Until the spell ends,
the target also has disadvantage on 5trength checks
and 5trength saving throws. The target's weapons also
shrink to match its new size. While these weapons are
reduced, the target's attacks with them deal ld4 less
damage (this can't reduce the damage below 1).

ELEMENTAL

WEAPON

3rd-/evel transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
A nonmagical weapon you touch becomes a magic
weapon. Choose one of the following damage types:
acid, cold, tire, Iightning, or thunder. For the duration,
the weapon has a +1 bonus to attack rolls and deals an
extra ld4 damage of the chosen type when it hits.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 5th or 6th leveI. the bonus to attack rolls
increases to +2 and the extra damage increases to
2d4. When you use a spell slot of 7th levei ar higher,
the bonus increases to +3 and the extra damage
increases to 3d4.
ENHANCE

ABILITY

2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (fur ar a feather from a beast)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour.
Vou touch a creature and bestow upon it a magical
enhancement. Choose one of the following effects; the
target gains that effect until the spell ends.
Bear's Endurance. The target has advantage on
Constitution checks. lt also gains 2d6 temporary hit
points, which are lost when the spell ends.
BulJ's Strength. The target has advantage
on 5trength checks, and his or her carrying
capacity doubles.
Cat's Grace. The target has advantage on Dexterity
checks. lt also doesn't take damage from falling 20 feet
or less if it isn't incapacitated.
Eagle's Splendor. The target has advantage on
Charisma checks.
Fox's Cunning. The target has advantage on
Intelligence checks.
Owl's Wisdom. The target has advantage on
Wisdom checks.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd leveI or higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot leveI above 2nd.

ENSNARING

STRIKE

1st-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: 5elf
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
The next time you hit a creature with a weapon attack
before this spell ends, a writhing mass of thorny vines
appears at the point of impact, and the target must
succeed on a 5trength saving throw ar be restrained by
the magical vines until the spell ends. A Large ar larger
creature has advantage on this saving throw. If the
target succeeds on the save, the vines shrivel away.
While restrained by this spell, the target takes ld6
piercing damage at the start of each of its turns. A creature
restrained by the vines or one lhat can touch the creature
can use its action to make a 5trength check against your
spell save De. On a success, the target is freed.
At Higher LeveIs. If you cast this spell using a spell
slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by ld6
for each slot levei above 1sI.

PART 3 I SPlI

LS

237

ENTANGLE

1st.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Grasping weeds and vines sprout fram the ground in a
20-foot square starting from a point within range. For
the duration, these plants turo the ground in the area
into difficult terrain.
A creature in the area when you cast the spell must
succeed on a Strength saving throw ar be restrained
by the entangling plants until the spell ends. A creature
restrained by the plants can use its action to make
a Strength check against your spell save De. On a
success, it frees itself.
When the spell ends, the conjured plants wilt away.
ENTHRALL

2nd.level enchantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: 1 minute
Vou weave a distracting string of words, causing
creatllres ofyour choice that you can see within range
and that can hear you to make a Wisdom saving
throw. Any creature that can't be charmed succeeds
on this saving throw automatically, and if you or YOllr
companions are fighting a creature, it has advantage on
the save. On a failed save, the target has disadvantage
on Wisdom (Perception) checks made to perceive any
creature other than you until the spell ends or until the
target can no longer hear YOll.The spell ends if you are
incapacitated or can no longer speak.

When the spell ends, you immediately returo to the
plane you originated from in lhe spot you currently
occupy. If you occupy the same spot as a solid object
or creature when this happens, you are immediately
shunted to the nearest unoccupied space that you
can occupy and take force damage equal to twice lhe
number of feet you are moved.
This spell has no effect if you cast il while you are on
the Ethereal Plane or a plane that doesn't border it, such
as one of the Outer Planes.
At Higher Leve1s. When you cast this spell using
a spell slol of 81h leveI or higher, you can target up to
three willing crealures (including you) for each slot levei
above 7th. The creatures musl be within 10 feet of you
when you cast the spell.
EVARD'S BLACK TENTACLES

4th.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V,S, M (a piece of tentacle from a giant
octopus or a giant squid)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Squirming, ebony tentades fill a 20.foot square on
ground that you can see within range. For the duration,
these tentacles turo lhe ground in the area into
difficult terrain.
When a creature enlers the affected area for the first
time on aturo or starts its turo lhere, the creature
must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take 3d6
bludgeoning damage and be restrained by the tentacles
until the spell ends. A creature that starts its turo in the
area and is already restrained by the tentacles lakes 3d6
bludgeoning damage,
A creature reslrained by the tentacles can use ils
action lo make a Strength ar Dexterity check (its choice)
against your spell save DC. On a success, it frees itself.

ETHEREALNESS

7th-leveI transmutation

EXPEDITIOUS

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V, S
Duration: Up to 8 hours

1st-leveI transmutation

Vou step into the border regions of the Ethereal Plane,
in the area where it overlaps with your current plane.
Vou remain in the Border Ethereal for the duration or
until you use your action to dismiss the spell. During
this time, you can move in any direction. If you move
up or down, every foot of movement costs an extra fool.
Vou can see and hear the plane YOlloriginated from, but
everything there looks gray, and you can't see anything
more than 60 feet away.
While on the Ethereal Plane, you can only affect and
be affected by other crealures on thal plane. Creatures
that aren't on the Elhereal Plane can't perceive you and
can't interact with you, unless a special ability ar magic
has given them the ability to do so.
You ignore ali objects and effects lhat aren't on the
Ethereal Plane, allowing you to move through objects
you perceive on the plane you originated from.

PART 3

I SPELLS

RETREAT

Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up lo 10 minutes
This spell allows you to move at an incredible pace.
When you cast this spell, and then as a bonus action
on each of your turos unlil the spell ends, you can take
the Dash action.
EYEBITE

6th.level necromancy
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
For the spell's duration, your eyes beco me an inky void
imbued with dread power. One creature of your choice
within 60 feet of you lhat you can see must succeed
on a Wisdom saving throw or be affected by one of the
following effects of your choice for the duralion. On

each of your turns until the spell ends, you can use
your aclion to target auother creature but can't target
a creature agaiu if it has succeeded on a saving throw
against this casting of eyebite,
As/eep. The targel falls unconscious, lt wakes up if it
takes any damage nr if another creature uses its action
to shake the sleeper awake,
Panicked. The target is frightened of you. On each
of its lurns, the frightened creature must take the
Dash action and move away from you by the safest and
shortest available route, unless there is nowhere to
move. lf the target moves to a place at least 60 feet away
from you where it can no longer see you, this effect ends.
Sickened. The target has disadvantage ou attack rolls
and ability checks. At the end of each of its turns, it can
make another Wisdom saving throw. lf it succeeds,
the effect ends.
FABRICATE

4th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: lO minutes
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou convert raw materiais into products of the same
material. For example, you can fabricate a wooden
bridge from a c1ump of trees, a rope from a patch of
hemp, and C10thes from flax or wool.
Choose raw materiais that you can see wilhin range.
Vou can fabricale a Large or smaller object (contained
within a lO-fool cube. ar eight connected 5-foot cubes),
given a sufficient quantity of raw material. If you
are working with metal. stone, or anolher mineral
substance, however, the fabricated object can be no
larger than Medium (coutained within a single 5-foot
cube). The quality of objects made by the spell is
commensurate with the quality of the raw materiais.
Creatures or magic items can't be created or
transmuted by this spell. Vou also can't use it to
create items that ordinarily require a high degree of
craftsmanship, such as jewelry, weapons. glass, or
armor, unless you have proficiency with the type of
artisan's tools used to craft such objects.
FAERIE FIRE

1st-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Each object in a 20-foot cube within range is outlined in
blue, green, or violet light (your choice). Any creature in
the area when lhe spell is cast is also outlined in light if
it fails a Dexterity saving throw. For lhe duration, objects
and affected creatures shed dim light in a 10.fool radius.
Any attack roll against an affected creature or object
has arlvantage if the attacker can see it, and the affected
creature or object can't benefit from being invisible.

FALSE LIFE

1st-levei necromancy
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V, S, M (a small amount of alcohol or
distilled spirits)
Duration: I hour
Bolstering yourself with a necromantic facsimile of life,
you gain Id4 + 4 temporary hit points for the rluration.
At Higher LeveIs. When you casl this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, you gain 5 adrlitional
temporary hit points for each slollevel above 1st.
FEAR

3rd-level iIIusion
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (30-foot cone)
Components: V, S, M (a white feather or the
heart of a hen)
Duration: Concentration, up lo 1 minule
Vou project a phantasmal image of a creature's worst
fears. Each creature in a 30-foot cone must succeed on
a Wisdom saving throw or rlrop whatever it is holrling
anrl beco me frightened for the duration.
While frightened by this spell, a creature must take
the Dash action and move away from you by lhe safest
available route on each of its turns, unless there is
nowhere to move. If the creature enrls its turn in a
location where it doesn't have line of sight to you,
the creature can make a Wisdom saving throw. On a
successful save, the spell enrls for that creature.
FEATHER FALL

1st-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I reaction, which you take when you or a
creature within 60 feet of YOII falls
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, M (a sma 11feat her or piece of down)
Duration: I minute
Choose up to five falling creatures within range. A
falling creature's rate of descent slows to 60 feet per
round until the spell ends. lf the creature lands before
the spell ends, it takes no falling damage and can land
on its feel, and the spell ends for that creature.
FEEBLEMIND

8th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: ISO feet
Components: V, S, M (a handful of c1ay,crystal, glass,
or mineral spheres)
Durat;on: Instantaneous
Vou hlast the mind of a crealure that you can see within
range, altempting to shatter its intellect and personality.
The target takes 4d6 psychic damage and must make an
Intelligence saving throw.
On a failed save, the creature's Intclligence and
Charisma scores become I. The creature can't cast
spells, activate magic items, understand language, or

P\kT3

l'

L

communicate in any intelligible way. The creature can,
however, identify its friends, follow them, and even
protect them.
At the end of every 30 days, the creature can repeat
its saving throw against this spell. If it succeeds on its
saving throw, the spell ends.
The spell can also be ended by greater restoration,
heal, or wish.
FEIGN DEATH

3rd-Ievel necromancy (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (a pinch of graveyard dirt)
Duration: 1 hour
Vou touch a willing creature and put it into a cataleptic
state that is indistinguishable from death.
For the spell's duration, or until you use an action
to touch the target and dismiss the spell, the target
appears dead to ali outward inspection and to spells
used to determine the target's status. The target is
blinded and incapacitated, and its speed drops to O.
The target has resistance to ali damage except psychic
damage. If the target is diseased or poisoned when you
cast the spell, or becomes diseased or poisoned while
under the spell's effect, the disease and poison have no
effect until the spell ends.
FINO FAMILIAR

1st-levei conjuratian (ritual)
Casting Time: I hour
Range: 10 feet
Components: V, 5, M (10 gp worth af charcaal,
incense, and herbs that must be consumed by fire in a
brass brazier)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou gain the service of a familiar, a spirit that takes an
animal form you choose: bat, cat, crab, frog (toad), hawk,
lizard, octopus, owl, poisonous snake, fish (quipper),
rat, raven, sea horse, spider, or weasel. Appearing in
an unoccupied space within range, the familiar has the
statistics of the chosen form, though it is a celestial, fey,
or fiend (your choice) instead of a beast.
Your familiar acts independently of you, but it always
obeys your commands. In combat, it rolls its own
initiative and acts on its own turno A familiar can't
attack, but it can take other actions as normal.
When the familiar drops to O hit points, it disappears,
leaving behind no physical formo It reappears after you
cast this spell again
While your familiar is within 100 feet of you, you
can communicate with it telepathically. Additionally,
as an action, you can see through your familiar's eyes
and hear what it hears until the start of your next turn,
gaining the benefits of any special senses that the
familiar has. During this time, you are deaf and blind
with regard to your own senses.
As an action, you can temporarily dismiss your
familiar. It disappears into a pocket dimension where it
awaits your summons. Alternatively, you can dismiss it
forever. As an action while it is temporarily dismissed,

PART 3

SPELLS

you can cause it to reappear in any unoccupied space
within 30 feet of YOU.
Vou can't have more than one familiar at a time. If you
cast this spell while you already have a familiar, you
instead cause it to adopt a new formo Choose one of the
forms from the above list. Your familiar transforms into
the chosen creature.
Finally, when you cast a spell with a range of touch,
your familiar can deliver the spell as if it had cast the
spell. Your familiar must be within 100 feet of you, and
it must use its reaction to deliver the spell when you cast
it. If the spell requires an attack roll, you use your attack
modifier for the roll.
FINO STEEO

2nd-levei conjuration
Castiog Time: 10 minutes
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, 5
Duratioo: Instantaneous
Vou summon a spirit that assumes the form of an
unusually intelligent, strong, and loyal steed, creating a
long-Iasting bond with it. Appearing in an unoccupied
space within range, the steed takes on a form that you
choose, such as a warhorse, a pony, a camel, ao elk, or
a mastiff. (Your DM might allow other animais to be
summoned as steeds.) The steed has the statistics of the
chosen form, though it is a celestial, fey, or fiend (your
choice) instead of its normal type. Additionally, if yaur
steed has an Intelligence of 5 or iess, its Intelligence
becomes 6, and it gains the ability to understaod one
laoguage of your choice that you speak.
Your steed serves you as a mount, both in combat and
out, and you have an instinctive bond with it that allows
you to fight as a seamless unit. While mounted on your
steed, you can make any spell you cast that targets only
you also target your steed.
Wheo the steed drops to O hit points, it disappears,
leaving behind no physical formo Vou can also
dismiss your steed at any time as an action, causing
it to disappear. In either case, casting this spell
again summons the same steed, restored to its hit
point maximum.
While your steed is within 1 mile of you, you can
communicate with it telepathically.
You can't have more than one steed bonded by this
spell at a time. As an action, you can release the steed
from its bond at any time, causing it to disappear.
FINO THE PATH

6th-levei divination
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 5elf
Components: V, 5, M (a set of divinatory tools-such
as bones, ivory sticks, cards, teeth, or carved runesworth 100 gp and an object from the location you
wish to find)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 day
This spell allows you to find the shortest, most direct
physical route to a specific fixed location that you are
familiar with on the same plane of existence. Ir you

name a destination on another plane of existenee, a
destination that moves (sueh as a mobile fortress), or a
destination that isn't specilie (sueh as "a green dragon's
lair"), the spell fails.
For the duration, as long as you are on the same plane
of existenee as the destination, you know how far it is
and in what direetion it lies. While you are traveling
there, whenever you are presented with a ehoiee of
paths along the way, you automatieally determine whieh
path is the shortest and most direet route (but not
neeessarily the safest route) to the destination.
FIND TRAPS

2nd-leveI divination
Casting Time: 1 aetion
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
You sense the presenee of any trap within range that
is within line of sight. A trap, for the purpose of this
spell, includes anything that would inflict a sudden or
unexpeeted effeet you eonsider harmful or undesirable,
which was speeilieally intended as sueh by its ereator.
Thus, the spell would sense an area affeeted by the
alarm spell, a glyph of warding, or a meehanieal pit trap,
but it would not reveal a natural weakness in the floor,
an unstable eeiling, or a hidden sinkhole.
This spell merely reveals that a trap is present. You
don't learo the loeation of eaeh trap, but you do learo the
general nature of the danger posed by a trap you sense.
FINGE R OF DEATH

7th-leveI neeromaney
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
You send nega tive energy coursing through a ereature
that you ean see within range, causing it searing pain.
The target must make a Constitution saving throw. It
takes 7d8 + 30 necrotic damage on a failed save, or half
as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.
A humanoid killed by this spell rises at the start of
your next turo as a zombie that is permanently under
your command, following your verbal orders to the best
of its ability.
FIREBALL

3rd~evelevoeaUon
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 150 feet
Components: V, S, M (a tiny ball of bat
guano and sulfur)
Duration: Instantaneous
A bright streak flashes from your pointing linger to a
point you ehoose within range and then blossoms with
a low roar into an explosion of flame. Each creature
in a 20-foot-radius sphere eentered on that point must
make a Dexterity saving throw. A target takes 8d6 /ire

damage on a failed save, or half as mueh damage on a
sueeessful one,
The /ire spreads around eorners. It ignites flammable
objeets in the area that aren't being worn or earried.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spell using a
spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the damage inereases by
Id6 for eaeh slot levei above 3rd.
FIRE BOLT

Evoeation eantrip
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou hurl a mote of /ire at a ereature or objeet within
range. Make a ranged spell attaek against the
targel. On a hit, the target takes IdlO /ire damage. A
flammable objeet hit by this spell ignites if it isn't being
worn or earried.
This spell's damage inereases by IdlO when you reaeh
5th levei (2dlO), 11th levei (3d 10), and 17th levei (4dlO).
FIRE SHIELD

4th./evel evoeation
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 5elf
Components: V, 5, M (a bit of phosphorus or a /irefly)
Duration: 10 minutes
Thin and wispy flames wreathe your body for the
duration, shedding bright light in a 10.foot radius and
dim light for an additional lO feel. Vou ean end the spell
early by using an aetion to dismiss il.
The flames provi de YOllwith a warm shield or a ehill
shield, as you ehoose. The warm shield grants you
resistanee to eold damage, and the ehill shield grants
you resistanee to /ire damage.
In addition, whenever a ereature within 5 feet of you
hits you with a melee attaek, the shield erupts with
flame. The attaeker takes 2d8 /ire damage from a warm
shield, or 2d8 eold damage from a eold shield.
FIRE STORM

7th./evel evoeation
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 150 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Instantaneous
A storm made up of sheets of roaring flame appears
in a loeation you ehoose within range. The area of the
storm eonsists of up to ten 10.foot eubes, whieh you ean
arrange as you wish. Eaeh eube must have at least one
faee adjaeent to the faee of another eube. Eaeh ereature
in the area must make a Dexterity saving throw. It
takes 7d 10 /ire damage on a failed save, or half as mueh
damage on a sueeessful one.
The /ire damages objeets in the area and ignites
flammable objeets that aren't being worn or earried.
If you ehoose, plant life in the area is unaffeeted
by this spell.

PART 3

I SPELLS

FLAME BLADE

2nd./evel evoeation
Casting Time: I bonus aetion
Range: 5elf
Components: V, 5, M (leaf of sumae)
Duration: Coneentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou evoke a /iery blade in your free hand. The blade is
similar in size and shape to a seimitar, and it lasts for
the duration. lf you let go of the blade, it disappears, but
YOllean evoke the blade again as a bonus aetion.
Vou ean use your aetion to make a melee spel1
attaek with the /iery blade. On a hit, the target takes
3d6 /ire damage.
The flaming blade sheds bright light in a 10.foot
radills and dim light for an additional 10 feel.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spel1 lIsing a
spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the damage inereases by
Id6 for every two slot leveIs above 2nd.
FLAME STRIKE

5th-levei evocation
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5, M (pineh of sulfur)
Duration: Instantaneous
A vertieal column of divine /ire roars down from the
heavens in a loeation YOllspecify. Eaeh ereature in
a lO.foot.radius, 40.foot-high cylinder eentered on a
point within range must make a Dexterity saving throw.
A ereature takes 4d6 /ire damage and 4d6 radiant
damage on a failed save, or half as mueh damage on a
sueeessful one.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spel1 using a
spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the /ire damage or the
radiant damage (your ehoice) inereases by Id6 for eaeh
slot levei above 5th.
FLAMING

SPHERE

2nd-levei eonjuration
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 60 feet
Components: V. 5, M (a bit of tallow, a pineh of
brimstone, and a dusting of powdered iran)
Duration: Coneentration, up to I minute
A 5-foot.diameter sphere of /ire appears in an
unoeeupied spaee of your ehoice within range and lasts
for the duration. Any ereature that ends its turn within 5
feet of the sphere must make a Dexterity saving thraw.
The ereature takes 2d6 /ire damage on a failed save, or
half as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.
As a bonus aetion, you ean move the sphere up to 30
feel. If you ram the sphere into a ereature, that ereature
must make the saving throw against the sphere's
damage, and the sphere stops moving this turno
When you move the sphere, you ean direet it over
barriers up to 5 feet tall and jump it aeross pits up to
lO feet wide. The sphere ignites flammable objeets not
being worn or earried, and it sheds bright light in a
20.foot radius and dim light for an additional 20 feel.

At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the damage increases by
Id6 for each slot levei above 2nd.
FLESH TO STONE

6th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of lime, water, and earth)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vou attempt to turo one creature that you can see within
range into stone. If the target's body is made of flesh, the
creature must make a Constitution saving throw. On a
failed save, it is restrained as its Aesh begins to harden.
On a successful save, the creature isn't affected.
A creature restrained by this spell must make another
Constitution saving throw at the end of each of its turos.
lf it successfully saves against this spell three times, the
spell ends. If it fails its saves three times, it is turoed
to stone and subjected to the petrified condition for the
duration. The successes and failures don't need to be
consecutive; keep track of both until the target collects
three of a kind.
lf the creature is physically broken while petrified,
it suffers from similar deformities if it reverts to its
original state.
lf you maintain your concentration on this spell for the
entire possible duration, the creature is turoed to stone
until the effect is removed.
FLY

3rd-Ievel transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a wing feather from any blrd)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou touch a willing creature. The target gains a flying
speed of 60 feet for the duration. When the spell ends,
the target falls if it is still aloft, unless It can stop the falI.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot levei above 3rd.
FOG CLOUD

1st-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to I hOllr
Vou create a 20-foot-radius sphere of fog centered on a
point within range. The sphere spreads around coroers,
and its area is heavily obscured. It lasts for the duration
or until a wind of moderate or greater speed (at least 10
miles per hour) disperses it.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the radius of the fog
increases by 20 feet for each slot levei above 1st.

FORBIDDANCE

6th-leveI abjuration (ritual)
Casting Time: 10 mlnutes
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a sprinkling of holy water, rare
incense, and powdered ruby worth at least 1,000 gp)
Duration: I day
Vou create a ward against magical traveI that protects
up to 40,000 square feet of floar space to a height of 30
feet above the floor. For the duration, creatures can't
teleport into the area or use portais. such as those
created by the gate spell. to enter the area. The spell
proofs the area against planar travei, and therefore
prevents creatllres from accessing the area by way of
the Astral Plane, Ethereal Plane, Feywild, Shadowfell,
or the plane shift spell.
In addition, the spell damages types of crealures thal
you choose when you cast it. Choose one or more of the
following: celestiaIs, elementals, fey,fiends, and undead.
When a chosen creature enlers the spell's area for lhe
firsllime on aturo or slarls its luro there, the creature
takes 5d1O radianl or necrotic damage (your choice
when you cast this spell).
When you cast this spell, you can designate a
password. A creature that speaks the password as it
enters the area takes no damage from the spell.
The spell's area can't overlap with the area of another
forbiddance spell. If you cast forbiddance every day for
30 days in the same location, the spell lasts until It is
dispelled, and the material components are consumed
on the last casting.
FORCECAGE

7th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 100 feet
Components: V, S, M (ruby dllst worth 1,500 gp)
Duration: I hOllr
An immobile, invisible, cube-shaped prison composed of
magical force springs into existence around an area you
choose within range. The prison can be a cage or a solid
box, as you choose.
A prison in the shape of a cage can be up to 20 feet on
a side and is made from 1/2-inch dia meter bars spaced
1/2 inch apart.
A prison in the shape of a box can be up to 10 feet on
a side, creating a solid barrier that prevents any matter
from passing throllgh it and blocking any spells cast into
or out from the area.
When you cast the spell, any creature that is
completely inside the cage's area is trapped. Creatures
only partially within the area, or those too large to fit
Inside the area, are pushed away from the center of the
area until they are completely outside the area.
A creature inside the cage can't leave It by nonmagical
means, If the creature tries to use teleportation or
interplanar travei to leave the cage, it must first make a
Charisma saving throw. On a success, the creature can

PART 3

SPELLS

use that magic to exit the cage. On a failure, the creature
can't exit the cage and wastes the use of the spell or
effecl. The cage also extends into the Ethereal Plane,
blocking ethereal traveI.
This spell can't be dispelled by dispel magic.
FORESIGHT

9th-leveI divination
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M (a hummingbird feather)
Duration: 8 hours
Vou touch a willing creature and bestow a limited ability
to see into the immediate future. For the duration, the
target can't be surprised and has advantage on attack
rolls, ability checks, and saving throws. Additionally,
other creatures have disadvantage on attack rolls
against the target for the duration.
This spell immediately ends if you cast it again before
its duration ends.

Components: V, 5. M (a bit of gauze and a
wisp of smoke)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Vou transform a willing creature you touch, along with
everything it's wearing and carrying, into a misty cloud
for the duration. The spell ends if the creature drops to
O hit points. An incorporeal creature isn't affected.
While in this form, the target's only method of
movement is a flying speed of 10 feel. The target can
ente r and occupy the space of another creature. The
target has resistance to nonmagical damage, and it has
advantage on 5trength, Dexterity, and Constitution
saving throws. The target can pass through small holes,
narrow openings, and even mere cracks, though it treats
liquids as though they were solid surfaces. The target
can't fali and remains hovering in the air even when
stunned or otherwise incapacitated.
While in the form of a misty cloud, the target can't talk
or manipulate objects, and any objects it was carrying or
holding can't be dropped, used, or otherwise interacted
with. The target can't attack or cast spells.

FREEDOM OF MOVEMENT

4th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (a leather strap, bound around the
arm or a similar appendage)
Duration: 1 hour
Vou touch a willing creature. For the duration, the
target's movement is unaffected by difficult terrain, and
spells and other magical effects can neither reduce
the target's speed nor cause the target to be paralyzed
or restrained.
The target can also spend 5 feet of movement to
automatically escape from nonmagical restraints, such
as manacles or a creature that has it grappled. Finally,
being underwater imposes no penalties on the target's
movement or attacks.
FRIENDS

Enchantmentcantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 5elf
Components: 5, M (a small amount of makeup applied
to the face as this spell is cast)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
For the duration, you have advantage on ali Charisma
checks directed at one creature of your choice that isn't
hostile toward you. When the spell ends, the creature
realizes that you used magic to influence its mood
and becomes hostile toward you. A creature prone
to violence might attack you. Another creature might
seek retribution in other ways (at the DM's discretion),
depending on the nature of your interaction with il.
GASEOUS FORM

3rd-IeveI transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch

PART 3

I SPELLS

GATE

9th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5, M (a diamond worth at least 5.000 gp)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Vou conjure a portallinking an unoccupied space you
can see within range to a precise location on a different
plane of existence. The portal is a circular opening,
which you can make 5 to 20 feet in diameter. Vou can
orient the portal in any direction you choose. The portal
lasts for the duration.
The portal has a front and a back on each plane where
it appears. Travei through the portal is possible only
by moving through its fronl. Anything that does so is
instantly transported to the other plane, appearing in
the unoccupied space nearest to the portal.
Deities and other planar ruIers can prevent portaIs
created by this spell from opening in their presence or
anywhere within their domains.
When you cast this spell, you can speak the name
of a specific creature (a pseudonym, title, or nickname
doesn't work). ]f that creature is on a plane other than
the one you are on, the portal opens in the named
creature's immediate vicinity and draws the creature
through it to the nearest unoccupied space on your side
of the portal. Vou gain no special power over the creature,
and it is free to act as the DM deems appropriate. lt
might leave, attack you, or help you.
GEAS

5th~eveIenchantment
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: 30 days
Vou place a magical command on a creature that you
can see within range, forcing it to carry out some

service or refrain fram some action or course of activity
as you decide. ]f the creature can understand you, it
must succeed on a Wisdom saving thraw or become
charmed by you for the duration. While the creature
is charmed by you, it takes 5dlO psychic damage
each time it acts in a manner directly counter to your
instructions, but no more than once each day. A creature
that can't understand you is unaffected by the spell.
Vou can issue any command you choose, short of an
activity that would result in certain death. Should you
issue a suicidal command, the spell ends.
Vou can end the spell early by using an action to
dismiss it. A remove curse, greater restoration, or wish
spell also ends it.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 7th or 8th leveI, the duration is 1 year.
When you cast this spell using a spell slot of 9th leveI,
the spelllasts until it is ended by one of the spells
mentioned above.
GENTLE

REPOSE

2nd-level necromallcy (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of salt and one copper
piece placed on each of the corpse's eyes, which must
remain there for the duration)
Duration: 10 days
Vou touch a corpse or other remains. For the
duration, the target is protected from decay and can't
become undead.
The spell also effectively extends the time Iimit on
raising the target from the dead, since days spent under
the influence of this spell don't count against the time
limit of spells such as raise dead.
GIANT

INSECT

4th-level transmutatioll
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou transform up to ten centipedes, three spiders, tive
wasps, or one scorpion within range into giant versions
of their natural forms for the duration. A centipede
becomes a giant centipede, a spider becomes a giant
spider, a wasp becomes a giant wasp, and a scorpion
becomes a giant scorpion.
Each creature obeys your verbal commands, and
in combat, they act on your tum each raund. The DM
has the statistics for these creatures and resolves their
actions and movement.
A creature remains in its giant size for the duration,
until it draps to O hit points, or until you use an action to
dismiss the effect on it.
The DM might allow you to choose different targets.
For example, if you transform a bee, its giant version
might have the same statistics as a giant wasp.

GLIBNESS

8th-level transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: 1 hour
Until the spell ends, when you make a Charisma
check, you can replace the number you rall with aiS.
Additionally, no matter what you say, magic that would
determine if you are telling the truth indicates that you
are being truthful.
GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY

6th-level abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self (lO-foot radius)
Components: V, S, M (a glass or crystal bead that
shatters when the spell ends)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
An immobile, faintly shimmering barrier springs into
existence in a lO-foot radius around you and remains for
the duration.
Any spell of 5th leveI or lower cast from outside the
barrier can't affect creatures or objects within it, even
if the spell is cast using a higher leveI spell slot. Such a
spell can target creatures and objects within the barrier,
but the spell has no effect on them. Similarly, the area
within the barrier is excluded fram the areas affected
by such spells.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 7th leveI or higher, the barrier blocks spells
of one levei higher for each slot leveI above 6th.
GLYPH OF WARDING

3rd-level abjuration
Casting Time: 1 hour
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (incense and powdered diamond
worth at least 200 gp. which the spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled or triggered
When you cast this spell, you inscribe a glyph that
harms other creatures, either upon a surface (such as
a table or a section of floor or wall) or within an object
that can be closed (such as a book, a scroll, or a treasure
chest) to conceal the glyph. If you choose a surface, the
glyph can cover an area of the surface no larger than
10 feet in dia meter. lf you choose an object, that object
must remain in its place; if the object is moved more
than lO feet from where you cast this spell, the glyph is
broken, and the spell ends without being triggered.
The glyph is nearly invisible and requires a successful
Intelligence (lnvestigation) check against your spell save
DC to be found.
Vou decide what triggers the glyph when you cast
the spell. For glyphs inscribed on a surface, the most
typical triggers include touching or standing on the
glyph, removing another object covering the glyph,
approaching within a certain distance of the glyph, or
manipulating the object on which the glyph is inscribed.
For glyphs inscribed within an object, the most common

PART 3

I SPELLS

245

lriggers include opening lhal objecl, approaching wilhin
a cerlain dislance of lhe objecl, or seeing or reading lhe
glyph. Once a glyph is lriggered, lhis spell ends.
Vou can furlher retine lhe lrigger so lhe spell aclivales
only under cerlain circumslances or according lo
physical characlerislics (such as heighl or weighl),
crealure kind (for example, the ward could be seI lo
affecl aberralions or drow), or alignment. Vou can also
seI condilions for crealures lhal don'l lrigger lhe glyph,
such as lhose who say a cerlain password.
When you inscribe lhe glyph, choose expiosive runes
or a spell glyph.
Explosive Runes. When lriggered, lhe glyph erupls
with magical energy in a 20-fool-radius sphere cenlered
on lhe glyph. The sphere spreads around corners. Each
crealure in lhe area musl make a Dexlerily saving
lhrow. A crealure takes Sd8 acid, cold, tire, lighlning, or
thunder damage on a failed saving lhrow (your choice
when you creale the glyph), or half as much damage on a
successful one.
SpelJ Glyph. Vou can slore a prepared spell of
3rd levei or lower in lhe glyph by casling it as parI
of crealing lhe glyph. The spell musl largel a single
crealure or an area. The spell being slored has no
immediale effecl when casl in lhis way. When lhe glyph
is lriggered, lhe slored spell is cast. If lhe spell has a
largel, il largels lhe crealure lhal lriggered lhe glyph.
If lhe spell affecls an area, lhe area is cenlered on
lhal crealure. Ir lhe spell summons hoslile crealures
or creales harmful objecls or lraps, lhey appear as
close as possible lo lhe inlruder and attack it. Ir lhe
spell requires concenlralion, il !asls unlil lhe end of ils
full duralion.
At Higher Leveis. When you casl lhis spell using
a spell slol of 41h levei or higher, lhe damage of an
expiosive runes glyph increases by Id8 for each si01
levei above 3rd. If you creale a spell glyph, you can slore
any spell of up lo lhe same leve! as lhe si01you use for
lhe giyph of warding.
GOODBERRY

1st-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M (a sprig of mistleloe)
Duration: Inslanlaneous
Up lo len berries appear in your hand and are infused
wilh magic for lhe duralion. A crealure can use ilS
aclion to eal one berry. Ealing a berry reslores I hil
poinl, and lhe berry provides enough nourishmenl lo
suslain a creature for one day.
The berries lose lheir polency if lhey have nol been
consumed wilhin 24 hours of lhe casling of lhis spell.
GRASPING

VINE

4th-ievei conjuration
Casting Time: I bonus aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V, S
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo I minule

Vou conjure a vine lhal sprouls from lhe ground in an
unoccupied space of your choice lhal you can see wilhin
range. When you casl lhis spell, you can direcl lhe vine
lOlash oul at a crealure wilhin 30 feel of il lhal you can
see. Thal crealure musl succeed on a Dexlerily saving
lhrow or be pulled 20 feel direclly loward lhe vine.
Unlil lhe spell ends, you can direcl lhe vine lo lash oul
aI lhe same crealure or anolher one as a bonus aclion
on each of your lurns.
GREASE

1st-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5, M (a bil of pork rind or butter)
Duration: I minule
5lick grease covers lhe ground in a lO-fool square
cenlered on a poinl wilhin range and lurns il inlo
difficull lerrain for lhe duralion.
When lhe grease appears, each crealure slanding in
ils area musl succeed on a Dexlerity saving lhrow or fali
prone. A crealure thal enlers lhe area or ends ils lurn
lhere musl also succeed on a Dexlerily saving lhrow
or fali prone.
GREATER

INVISIBILITY

4th-levei ilIusion
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: Touch
Components: V.5
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo I minule
Vou or a crealure you louch becomes invisible unlil lhe
spell ends. Anylhing lhe largel is wearing or carrying is
invisible as long as il is on lhe largel's person.
GREATER

RESTORATlON

5th-ievei abjuration
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M (diamond dusl worlh aI leasl 100
gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: Inslanlaneous
Vou imbue a crealure you louch wilh posilive energy lo
undo a debililating effect. Vou can reduce lhe largel's
exhauslion leveI by one, or end one of lhe following
effecls on lhe largel:
One effecl lhat charmed or pelritied lhe largel
One curse, including lhe larget's attunemenl lo a
cursed magic ilem
Any reduclion lo one of lhe largel's abilily scores
One effecl reducing lhe larget's hil poinl maximum
GUARDIAN

OF FAITH

4th-ievei conjuration
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V
Duration: 8 hours
A Large speclral guardian appears and hovers for lhe
duralion in an unoccupied space of your choice lhal you

PART

3

I SPELLS

can see within range. The guardian occupies that space
and is indistinct except for a gleaming sword and shield
emblazoned with the symbol of your deity.
Any creature hostile to you that moves to a space
within lO feet of the guardian for the first time on a
turn must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw. The
creature takes 20 radiant damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful one. The guardian
vanishes when it has dealt a total of 60 damage.
GUARDS AND WARDS

6th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (burning incense, a small
measure of brimstone and oil, a knotled string, a
small amount of umber hulk blood, and a small silver
rod worth at least 10 gp)
Duration: 24 hours
Vou create a ward that protects up to 2,500 square feet
of floor space (an area 50 feet square, or one hundred
5-foot squares or twenty-five lO-foot squares). The
warded area can be up to 20 feet tall, and shaped as you
desire. Vou can ward several stories of a stronghold by
dividing the area among them, as long as you can walk
into each contiguous area while you are casting the spell.
When you cast this spell, you can specify individuais
that are unaffected by any or ali of the effects that
you choose. Vou can also specify a password that,
when spoken aloud, makes the speaker immune to
these effects.
Guards and wards creates the following effects within
the warded area.
Corridors. Fog fills ali the warded corridors, making
them heavily obscured. In addition, at each intersection
or branching passage offering a choice of direction,
there is a 50 percent chance that a creature other than
you will believe it is going in the opposite direction from
the one it chooses.
Doors. Ali doors in the warded area are magically
locked, as if sealed by an arcane lock spell. In addition,
you can cover up to ten doors with an illusion (equivalent
to the illusory object function of the minor illusion spell)
to make them appear as plain sections of wall.
Stairs. Webs fill ali stairs in the warded area from top
to botlom, as the web spell. These strands regrow in 10
minutes if they are burned or torn away while guards
and wards lasts.
Other SpelJ Effect. Vou can place your choice of one
of the following magical effects within the warded area
of the stronghold.
Place dancing lights in four corridors. Vou can designate a simple program that the lights repeat as long as
guards and wards lasts.
Place magic mouth in two locations.
Place stinking cloud in two locations. The vapors
appear in the places you designate; they return within
10 minutes if dispersed by wind while guards and
wards lasts.
Place a constant gust of wind in one corridor or room.

PART 3

I SPELLS

Place a suggestion in one location. Vou select an area
of up to 5 feet square, and any creature that enters
or passes through the area receives the suggestion
mentally.
The whole warded area radiates magic. A dispel
magic cast on a specific effect, if successful, removes
only that effect.
Vou can create a permanently guarded and warded
structure by casting this spell there every day
for one year.
GUIDANCE

Divination cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vou touch one willing creature. Once before the spell
ends, the target can roll a d4 and add the number rolled
to one ability check of its choice. lt can roll the die before
or after making the ability check. The spell then ends.
GUIDING

BOLT

1st-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: I rOllnd
A flash of light streaks toward a creature of your choice
within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the
target. On a hit, the target takes 4d6 radiant damage,
and the next atlack roll made against this target before
the end ofyour next turn has advantage, thanks to the
mystical dim light glittering on the target until then.
At Higher LeveIs. When YOllcast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by
Id6 for each slot levei above 1st.
GUSTOFWIND

2nd-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (60-foot line)
Components: V, S, M (a legume seed)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Aline of strong wind 60 feet long and 10 feet wide
blasts from you in a direction you choose for the spell's
duration. Each creature that starts its turn in the line
must succeed on a Strength saving throw or be pushed
15 feet away from you in a direction following the line.
Any creature in the line must spend 2 feet of
movement for every I foot it moves when moving
doser to YOU.
The gust disperses gas or vapor, and it extinguishes
candles, torches, and similar unprotected flames in
the area. It causes protected fiames, such as those of
lanterns, to dance wildly and has a 50 percent chance to
extingllish them.
As a bonus action on each of your turns before the
spell ends, you can change the direction in which the
line blasts from you.

HAIL OF THORNS

1st-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
The next time you hit a creature with a ranged weapon
atlack before the spell ends, this spell creates a rain
of thorns that sprouts from your ranged weapon or
ammunition. In addition to the normal effect of the
attack, the target of the atlack and each creature within
5 feet of it must make a Dexterity saving throw. A
creature takes Id 10 piercing damage on a failed save, ar
half as much damage on a successful one.
At Higher LeveIs. If you cast this spell using a spell
slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by IdlO
for each slot leveI above I st (to a maximum of 6d 10).
HALLOW

5th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 24 hours
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (herbs, oils, and incense worth at
least 1,000 gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled
Vou touch a point and infuse an area around it with holy
(or unholy) power. The area can have a radius up to 60
feet, and the spell fails if the radius includes an area
already under the effect a hallow spell. The affected area
is subject to the following effects.
First, celestiais, elementals, fey, fiends, and undead
can't enter the area, nor can such creatures charm,
frighten, or possess creatures within it. Any creature
charmed, frightened, or possessed by such a creature
is no longer charmed, frightened, or possessed upon
entering the area. Vou can exclude one or more of those
types of creatures from this effect.
Second, you can bind an extra effect to the area.
Choose the effect from the following list, or choose an
effect offered by the DM. Some of these effects apply to
creatures in the area; you can designate whether the
effect applies to ali creatures, creatures that follow a
specific deity or leader, or creatures of a specific sort,
such as orcs or trolls. When a creature that would be
affected enters the spell's area for the first time on a
turn or starts its turn there, it can make a Charisma
saving throw. On a success, the creature ignores the
extra effect until it leaves the area.
Courage. Affected creatures can't be frightened
while in the area.
Darkness. Darkness fills the area. Normallight,
as well as magicallight created by spells of a lower
levei than the slot you used to cast this spell, can't
illuminate the area.
DayJight. Bright light fills the area. Magical darkness
created by spells of a lower levei than the slot you used
to cast this spell can't extinguish the light.
Energy Protection. Affected creatures in the area
have resistance to one damage type of your choice,
except for bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing.

Energy VuInerabiJity. Affected creatures in the area
have vulnerability to one damage type of your choice,
except for bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing.
EverIasting Rest. Dead bodies interred in the area
can't be turned into undead.
Extradimensionallnterference.
Affected creatures
can't move or traveI using teleportation or by
extradimensional or interplanar means.
Fear. Affected creatures are frightened
while in the area.
SiJence. No sound can emanate from within the area,
and no sound can reach into it.
Tongues. Affected creatures can communicate with
any other creature in the area, even if they don't share a
common language.
HALLUCINATORY

TERRAIN

4th-levei iIIusion
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 300 feet
Components: V, S, M (a stone, a twig, and a bit
of green plant)
Duration: 24 hours
Vou make natural terrain in a 150-foot cube in range
look, sound, and smelllike some other sort of natural
terrain. Thus, open fields or a road can be made to
resemble a swamp, hill, crevasse, or some other difficult
or impassable terrain. A pond can be made to seem
like a grassy meadow, a precipice like a gentle slope,
or a rock-strewn gully like a wide and smooth road.
Manufactured structures, equipment, and creatures
within the area aren't changed in appearance.
The tactile characteristics of the terrain are
unchanged, so creatures entering the area are likely to
see through the illusion. If the difference isn't obvious
by touch, a creature carefully examining the illusion can
atlempt an Intelligence (lnvestigation) check against
your spell save DC to disbelieve it. A creature who
discerns the illusion for what it is, sees it as a vague
image superimposed on the terrain.
HARM

6th-levei necromancy
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou unleash a virulent disease on a creature that
you can see within range. The target must make a
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, it takes
14d6 necrotic damage, or half as much damage on a
successful save. The damage can't reduce the target's
hit points below I. ]f the target fails the saving throw,
its hit point maximum is reduced for I hour byan
amount equal to the necrotic damage it took. Any effect
that removes a disease allows a creature's hit point
maximum to return to normal before that time passes,

PART 3

SPELLS

249

HASTE

3rd-/evel transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,5, M (a shaving of licorice root)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Choose a willing creature that you can see within range.
Until the spell ends, the target's speed is doubled, it
gains a +2 bonus to AC, it has advantage on Dexterity
saving throws, and it gains an additional action on each
of its turns. That aclion can be used only lo lake the
Attack (one weapon attack only), Dash, Disengage, Hide,
or Use an Object aclion.
When lhe spell ends, the target can't move or take
actions until after its next turn, as a wave of lelhargy
sweeps over it.
HEAL

6th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Instantaneous
Choose a crealure lhat you can see within range. A
surge of posilive energy washes through the creature,
causing it to regain 70 hit points. This spell also ends
blindness, deafness, and any dise ases affecting the
larget. This spell has no effect on conslrucls or undead.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slol of 7th levei or higher, the amount of healing
increases by 10 for each slot leveI above 6th.
HEALING WORD

1st-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instanlaneous
A creature of your choice that you can see within range
regains hit points equal to Id4 + your spellcasting
ability modifier. This spell has no effect on undead
or constructs.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, lhe healing increases by
ld4 for each slol leveI above 1st.

If a creature is holding or wearing the object and
takes the damage from it, the creature must succeed on
a Constitution saving throw or drop the object if it cano lf
it doesn't drop the object, it has disadvantage on attack
rolls and ability checks until the start of your next turno
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the damage increases by
ld8 for each sIot leveI above 2nd.
HELLISH

REBUKE

1st-/evel evocation
Casting Time: 1 reaction, which you take in response
to being damaged bya creature within 60 feet of you
that you can see
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,5
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou point your finger, and the creature that damaged
you is momentarily surrounded by hellish flames. The
creature must make a Dexterity saving throw. It takes
2dlO fire damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by
ldl0 for each slot levei above 1st.
HEROES'

FEAST

6th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,5 , M (a gem-encrusted bowl worth at
least 1,000 gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou bring forth a great feast, including magnificent
food and drink. The feast takes I hour to consume and
disappears at the end of that time, and the beneficiai
effects don't set in until this hour is over. Up to twelve
other creatures can partake of the feast.
A creature that partakes of the feast gains several
benefits. The creature is cured of ali diseases and
poison, becomes immune to poison and being
frightened, and makes ali Wisdom saving throws with
advantage. Its hit point maximum also increases by
2dl0, and it gains the same number of hit points. These
benefits last for 24 hours.
HEROISM

HEAT METAL

2nd-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5, M (a piece of iron and a flame)
Duration: Concenlration, up to 1 minute
Choose a manufactured metal object, such as a metal
weapon or a suit of heavy or medium metal armor, that
you can see within range. Vou cause the object to glow
red-hot. Any creature in physical contact with the objecl
takes 2d8 fire damage when you cast the spell. Until the
spell ends, you can use a bonus action on each of your
subsequent turns to cause this damage again.

PART 3 I SPEL[,S

1st-levei enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
A willing creature you touch is imbued with bravery.
Until the spell ends, the creature is immune to being
frightened and gains temporary hit points equal to
your spellcasting ability modifier at the start of each
of its turns. When the spell ends, the target loses any
remaining temporary hit points from this spell.

At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher. you can target one
additional creature for each sIot levei above 1st.
HEX

1st-leveI enchantment
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V.S. M (the petrified eye of a newt)
Duration: Concentration. up to 1 hour
Vou place a curse on a creature that you can see within
range. Until the spell ends. you deal an extra Id6
necrotic damage to the target whenever you hit it with
an attack. AIso. choose one ability when you cast the
spell. The target has disadvantage on ability checks
made with the chosen ability.
If the target drops to O hit points before this spell
ends. you can use a bonus action on a subsequent turn
of yours to curse a new creature.
A remove curse cast on the target ends this spell early.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd or 4th leveI. you can maintain your
concentration on the spell for up to 8 hours. When you
use a spell slot of 5th levei or higher. you can maintain
your concentration on the spell for up to 24 hours.
HOLD MONSTER

5th-leveI enchantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V. S. M (a small. straight piece of iron)
Duration: Concentration. up to 1 minute
Choose a creature that you can see within range. The
target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or be
paralyzed for the duration. This spell has no effect on
undead. At the end of each of its turns, the target can
make another Wisdom saving throw. On a success. the
spell ends on the target.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 6th levei or higher. you can target one
additional creature for each slot leveI above 5th. The
creatures must be within 30 feet of each other when
you target them.
HOLD PERSON

2nd-leveI enchantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S. M (a small, straight piece of iron)
Duration: Concentration. up to 1 minute
Choose a humanoid that you can see within range.
The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw
or be paralyzed for the duration. At the end of each of
its turns. the target can make another Wisdom saving
throw. On a success. the spell ends on the target.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, you can target one
additional humanoid for each slot leveI above 2nd. The
humanoids must be within 30 feet of each other when
you target them.

HOLY AURA

8th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V. S. M (a tiny reliquary worth at least
1,000 gp containing a sacred relic, such as a scrap of
cloth from a saint's robe or a piece of parchment from
a religious text)
Duration: Concentration. up to 1 minute
Divine light washes out from you and coalesces
in a soft radiance in a 30-foot radius around you.
Creatures of your choice in that radius when you cast
this spell shed dim light in a 5-foot radius and have
advantage on ali saving throws. and other creatures
have disadvantage on attack rolls against them until
the spell ends. In addition, when a fiend or an undead
hits an affected creature with a melee attack. the aura
flashes with brilliant light. The attacker must succeed
on a Constitution saving throw or be blinded until
the spell ends.
HUNGER OF HADAR

3rd-level conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 150 feet
Components: V,S. M (a pickled octopus tentacle)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Vou open a gateway to the dark between the stars, a
region infested with unknown horrors. A 20-foot-radius
sphere of blackness and bitter cold appears. centered
on a point with range and lasting for the duration. This
void is filled with a cacophony of soft whispers and
slurping noises that can be heard up to 30 feet away. No
light, magical or otherwise, can illuminate the area, and
creatures fully within the area are blinded.
The void creates a warp in the fabric of space. and the
area is difficult terrain. Any creature that starts its turn
in the area takes 2d6 cold damage. Any creature that
ends its turn in the area must succeed on a Dexterity
saving throw or take 2d6 acid damage as milky.
otherworldly tentacles rub against it.
HUNTER'S

MARK

1st-leveI divination
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Vou choose a creature you can see within range and
mystically mark it as your quarry. Until the spell ends,
you deal an extra 1d6 damage to the target whenever
you hit it with a weapon attack. and you have advantage
on any Wisdom (Perception) or Wisdom (Survival)
check you make to find it. lf the target drops to O hit
points before this spell ends. you can use a bonus action
on a subsequent turn of yours to mark a new creature.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd or 4th leveI, you can maintain your
concentration on the spell for up to 8 hours. When you
use a spell slot of 5th levei or higher, you can maintain
your concentration on the spell for up to 24 hours.
PART 3 I SHLLS

HYPNOTIC

PATTERN

3rd-level iIIusion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: 5, M (a glowing stick of incense or a
crystal viaI filled with phosphorescent material)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Vou create a twisting pattern of colors that weaves
through the air inside a 30-foot cube within range.
The pattern appears for a moment and vanishes. Each
creature in the area who sees the pattern must make
a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature
becomes charmed for the duration. While charmed
by this spell, the creature is incapacitated and has
a speed ofO.
The spell ends for an affected creature if it takes any
damage or if someone e1se uses an action to shake the
creature out of its stupor.
ICE STORM

4th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 300 feet
Components: V,5, M (a pinch of dust and a few
drops of water)
Duration: Instantaneous
A hail of rock-hard ice pounds to the ground in a
20-foot-radius, 40-foot-high cylinder centered on a
point within range. Each creature in the cylinder must
make a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 2d8
bludgeoning damage and 4d6 cold damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
Hailstones turn the storm's area of effect into difficult
terrain until the end of your next turno
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 5th leveI or higher, the bludgeoning damage
increases by ld8 for each slot levei above 4th.
IDENTIFY

1st-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: Touch
Components: V,5, M (a pearl worth at least 100 gp and
an owl feather)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou choose one object that you must touch throughout
the casting of the spe11.If it is a magic item or some
other magic-imbued object, you learn its properties
and how to use them, whether it requires attunement
to use, and how many charges it has, if any. Vou learn
whether any spells are affecting the item and what they
are. lf the item was crealed by a spell, you learn which
spell created it.
lf you instead louch a crealure lhroughoullhe casling,
you learn whal spells, if any, are currenlly affecting i!.
ILLUSORY SCRIPT

1st-levei iIIusion (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 minule
Range: Touch

252

PART 3 I SPELLS

Components: 5, M (a lead-based ink worlh alleast 10
gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: 10 days
Vou write on parchmenl, paper, or some olher suilable
writing malerial and imbue il wilh a polent illusion lhal
lasls for the duralion.
To you and any crealures you designate when you
casllhe spell, the writing appears normal, written in
your hand, and conveys whalever meaning you intended
when you wrole lhe lex!. To ali olhers, lhe writing
appears as if il were written in an unknown ar magical
scripllhal is uninlelligible. Alternalively, you can cause
lhe wriling lo appear to be an entire1y differenl message,
written in a differenl hand and language, lhough lhe
language must be one you know.
5hould the spell be dispelled, the original scripl and
the illusion bolh disappear.
A crealure wilh lruesighl can read the
hidden message.
IMPRISONMENT

9th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1 minule
Range: 30 feel
Components: V, 5, M (a vellum depiclion or a carved
staluette in lhe likeness of the larget, and a special
componenllhal varies according lo lhe version of lhe
spell you choose, worth at least 500 gp per Hit Die
of lhe target)
Duration: Until dispelled
Vou create a magical restraint to hold a creature that
you can see within range. The target must succeed on
a Wisdom saving throw or be bound by the spell; if it
succeeds, it is immune lo this spell if you cast it again.
While affected by this spell, the creature doesn't need
to breathe, eat, or drink, and it doesn't age. Divination
spells can't locate or perceive the targe!.
When you cast the spell, you choose one of the
following forms of imprisonment.
Buria/. The target is entombed far beneath the earth
in a sphere of magical force that is just large enough to
contain the targe!. Nothing can pass through the sphere,
nor can any creature teleport or use planar traveI to get
into or out of i!.
The special component for this version of the spell is a
small mithral orb.
Chaining. Heavy chains, firmly rooted in the ground,
hold the target in place. The target is restrained until
the spell ends, and it can't move or be moved by any
means until then.
The special component for this version of the spell is a
fine chain of precious metal.
Hedged Prison. The spell transports the target into
a tiny demiplane that is warded against teleportation
and planar traveI. The demiplane can be a labyrinth, a
cage, a tower, or any similar confined structure or area
of your choice.
The special component for this version of the spell is a
miniature representation of the prison made from jade.
Minimus Containment. The target shrinks to a height
of 1 inch and is imprisoned inside a gemstone ar similar

object. Light can pass through the gemstone normally
(allowing the target to see out and other creatures to see
in), but nothing else can pass through, even by means of
teleportation or planar traveI. The gemstone can't be cut
or braken while the spell remains in effcct.
The special component for this version of the spell
is a large, transparent gemstone, such as a corundum,
diamond, or ruby.
Slumber. The target falls asleep and can't be awoken.
The speciai component for this version of the spell
consists of rare soporific herbs.
Ending the Spe/l. During the casting of the spell,
in any of its versions, you can specify a condition that
will cause the spell to end and release the target. The
condition can be as specific or as elaborate as you
choose, but the DM must agree that the condition is
reasonable and has a likelihood of coming to passo The
conditions can be based on a creature's name, identity,
or deity but otherwise must be based on observable
actions or qualities and not based on intangibles such as
levei, class, or hit points.
A dispel magic spell can end the spell only if it is cast
as a 9th.level spell, targeting either the prison or the
special component used to create it.
Vou can use a particular special component to create
only one prison at a time. If you cast the spell again
using the same component, the target of the first casting
is immediately freed fram its binding.
INCENDIARY

CLOUD

8th.level conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 150 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
A swirling cloud of smoke shot through with white-hot
embers appears in a 20.foot-radius sphere centered on
a point within range. The cloud spreads around corners
and is heavily obscured. It lasts for the duration or until
a wind of moderate or greater speed (at least 10 miles
per hour) disperses it.
When the cloud appears, each creature in it must
make a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes IOd8
/ire damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on
a successful one. A creature must also make this saving
throw when it enters the spell's area for the /irst time on
a turn or ends its turn there.
The cloud moves 10 feet directly away from you
in a direction that you choose at the start of each
of your turns.
INFLICT WOUNDS

Ist-level necromancy
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Make a melee spell attack against a creature you can
reach. On a hit, the target takes 3d1O necrotic damage.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the damage increases by
1d 10 for each slot levei above 1sI.

INSECT PLAGUE

5th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 300 feet
Components: V,S, M (a few grains of sugar, some
kernels of grain, and a smear of fat)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Swarming, biting locusts fill a 20-foot-radius sphere
centered on a point you choose within range, The sphere
spreads around corners. The sphere remains for the
duration, and its area is lightly obscured. The sphere's
area is difficult terrain.
When the area appears, each creature in it must
make a Constitution saving throw. A creature takes
4d 10 piercing damage on a failed save, ar half as much
damage on a successful one. A creature must also make
this saving throw when it enters the spell's area for the
first time on a turn ar ends its turn there.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 6th levei ar higher, the damage increases by
Id 10 for each slot levei above 5th.
INVISIBILITY

2nd-leveI ilIusion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (an eyelash encased
in gum arabic)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
A creature you touch becomes invisible until the spell
ends. Anything the target is wearing or carrying is
invisible as long as it is on the target's person. The spell
ends for a target that attacks ar casts a spell.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 3rd levei ar higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot levei above 2nd.
jUMP

1st-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a grasshopper's hind leg)
Duration: 1 minute
Vou touch a creature. The creature's jump distance is
tripled until the spell ends.
KNOCK

2nd-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Choose an object that you can see within range. The
object can be a door, a box, a chest, a set of manacles, a
padlock, ar another object that contains a mundane or
magical means that prevents access.
A target that is held shut bya mundane lock ar that
is stuck or barred becomes unlocked, unstuck, or

251

PART 3 I SPELLS

unbarred. lf the object has multiple locks, only one of
them is unlocked.
lf you choose a target that is held shut with arcane
lock, that spell is suppressed for 10 minutes, during
which time the target can be opened and shut normally.
When you cast the spell, a loud knock, audible from as
far away as 300 feet, emanates from the target objecl.
LEGEND

LORE

5th-levei divination
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: Self
Components: V, S, M (incense worth at least 250 gp,
which the spell consumes, and four ivory strips worth
at least 50 gp each)
Duration: Instantaneous
Name or describe a person, place, or object. The spell
brings to your mind a brief summary of the significant
lore about the thing you named. The lore might consist
of current tales, forgotten stories, or even secret lore
that has never been widely known. lf the thing you
named isn't of legendary importance, you gain no
information. The more information you already have
about the thing, the more precise and detailed the
information you receive is.
The information you learn is accurate but might be
couched in figurative language. For example, if you
have a mysterious magic axe on hand, the spell might
yield this information: "Woe to the evildoer whose hand
touches the axe, for even the haft slices the hand of the
evil ones. Only a true Child of Stone, lover and beloved
of Moradin, may awaken the true powers of the axe, and
only with the sacred word Rudnogg on the lips."
LEOMUND'S

SECRET CHEST

4th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (an exquisite chest, 3 feet by 2 feet
by 2 feet, constructed from rare materiaIs worth at
least 5,000 gp, and a Tiny replica made from the same
materiais worth at least 50 gp)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou hide a chest, and ali its contents, on the Ethereal
Plane. Vou must touch the chest and the miniature
replica that serves as a material component for the spell.
The chest can contain up to 12 cubic feet of nonliving
material (3 feet by 2 feet by 2 feet).
While the chest remains on the Ethereal Plane, you
can use an action and touch the replica to recall the
chesl. lt appears in an unoccupied space on the ground
within 5 feet of you. Vou can send the chest back to the
Ethereal Plane by using an action and touching both the
chest and the replica.
After 60 days, there is a cumulative 5 percent chance
per day that the spell's effect ends. This effect ends if
you cast this spell again, if the smaller replica chest is
destroyed, ar if you choose to end the spell as an action.
If the spell ends and the larger chest is on the Ethereal
Plane, it is irretrievably losl.

LEOMUNO'S

TINY HUT

LIGHT

3rd-/evel evocation (ritual)

Evocation cantrip

Casting Time: I minute
Range: Self (I O-foot-radius hemisphere)
Components: V, S, M (a small crystal bead)
Duration: 8 hours

Casting Time: I aetion
Range: Toueh
Components: V, M (a firelly or phosphorescent
Duration: I hour

A IO-foot-radius immobile dome of force springs into
existenee around and above you and remains stationary
for the duration. The spell ends if you leave its area.
Nine creatures of Medium size or smaller ean fit inside
the dome with you. The spell fails if its area includes a
larger ereature or more than nine ereatures. Creatures
and objeets within the dome when you east this spell
ean move through it freely. Ali other ereatures and
objeets are barred from passing through it. Spells and
other magical effeets ean't extend through the dome or
be east through it. The atmosphere inside the spaee is
eomfortable and dry, regardless of the weather outside.
Until the spell ends, you ean eommand the interior to
beeome dimly lit or dark. The dome is opaque from the
outside, of any eolor you ehoose, but it is transparent
from the inside.

Vou touch one objeet that is no larger than lO feet in any
dimensiono Until the spell ends, the objeet sheds bright
light in a 20-foot radius and dim light for an additional
20 feet. The light ean be eolored as you like. Completely
eovering the objeet with something opaque bloeks the
light. The spell ends ifyou east it again or dismiss it
as an aetion.
lf you target an objeet held or worn by a hostile
creature, that ereature must sueeeed on a Dexterity
saving throw to avoid the spell.

LESSER RESTORATION

2nd-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: Toueh
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou toueh a ereature and ean end either one disease or
one eondition afflieting it. The eondition ean be blinded,
deafened, paralyzed, or poisoned.
LEVITATE

2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S, M (either a small leather loop or a
pieee of golden wire bent into a eup shape with a long
shank on one end)
Duration: Coneentration, up to 10 minutes

LIGHTNING

ARROW

3rd-/evel transmutation
Casting Time: I bonus aetion
Range: Sei f
Components: V, S
Duration: Coneentration, up to I minute
The next time you make a ranged weapon attaek during
the spell's duration, the weapon's ammunition, or the
weapon itself if it's a thrown weapon, transforms into
a bolt of lightning. Make the attaek roll as normal. The
target takes 4d8 Iightning damage on a hit, or half
as mueh damage on a miss, instead of the weapon's
normal damage.
Whether you hit or miss, eaeh ereature within 10 feet
of the target must make a Dexterity saving throw. Eaeh
of these ereatures takes 2d8 lightning damage on a
failed save, or half as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.
The pieee of ammunition or weapon then returns to
its normal form.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spell using a
spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the damage for both
effeets of the spell inereases by Id8 for eaeh slot
leveI above 3rd.
LIGHTNING

One ereature or object of your ehoice that you ean see
within range rises vertieally, up to 20 feet, and remains
suspended there for the duration. The spell ean levitate
a target that weighs up to 500 pounds. An unwilling
ereature that sueeeeds on a Constitution saving throw
is unaffected.
The target ean move only by pushing or pulling
against a fixed objeet or surfaee within reaeh (sueh as
a wall or a eeiling), whieh allows it to move as if it were
climbing. Vou ean ehange the target's altitude by up to
20 feet in either direetion on your turno lf you are the
target, you ean move up or down as part of your move.
Otherwise, you can use your aetion to move the target,
whieh must remain within the spelI's range.
When the spell ends, the target lIoats gently to the
ground if it is still aloft.

moss)

BOLT

3rd-/evel evoeation
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: Self (lOO-foot line)
Components: V, S, M (a bit of fur and a rod of amber,
erystal, or glass)
Duration: [nstantaneous
A stroke of Iightning forming a line 100 feet long and 5
feet wide blasts out from you in a direetion you ehoose.
Eaeh ereature in the line must make a Dexterity saving
throw. A ereature takes 8d6 lightning damage on a
failed save, or half as mueh damage on a sueeessful one.
The lightning ignites lIammable objeets in the area
that aren't being worn or earried.
At Higher Leve/s. When you east this spell using a
spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, the damage inereases by
Id6 for eaeh slot levei above 3rd.

PART 3

SPELLS

255

LOCATE ANIMALS

OR PLANTS

2nd-leveI divinatian (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M (a bit af fur from a bloodhound)
Duration: Instantaneous
Describe ar name a specific kind of beast ar plant.
Concentrating on the voice of nature in your
surroundings, you learn the direction and distance to
the closest creature or plant of that kind within 5 miles,
if any are present.
LOCATE CREATURE

4th-leveI divination
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M (a bit of fur fram a bloodhound)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Describe ar name a creature that is familiar to you. Vou
sense the direction to the creature's lacation, as long as
that creature is within 1,000 feet ofyou.lfthe creature
is moving, you know the direction of its mavement.
The spell can locate a specific creature known to
you, ar the nearest creature of a specific kind (such as
a human ar a unicorn), 50 long as you have seen such a
creature up close-within 30 feet-at least once. If the
creature you described ar named is in a different form,
such as being under the effects of a palymarph spell,
this spell doesn't locate the creature.
This spel1 can't locate a creature if running water at
least 10 feet wide blocks a direct path between you and
the creature.
LOCATE OBJECT

2nd-leveI divinatian
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self
Components: V, S, M (a farked twig)
Duration: Cancentration, up to 10 minutes
Describe ar name an object that is familiar to you. Vou
sense the direction to the object's location, as lang as
that object is within 1,000 feet af you. If the object is in
motion, yau know the direction of its movement.
The spell can locate a specific object known to you,
as long as you have seen it up close-within 30 feet-at
least once, Alternatively, the spel1 can locate the nearest
abject of a particular kind, such as a certain kind of
apparel, jewelry, furniture, tool, ar weapon.
This spel1 can't locate an object if any thickness of
lead, even a thin sheet, blocks a direct path between you
and the object.
LONGSTRIDER

1st-leveI transmutatian
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of dirt)
Duration: 1 hour
Vou touch a creature. The target's speed increases by 10
feet until the spel1 ends.
PART 3

I SPELLS

At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spel1 using
a spell slot of 2nd levei ar higher, you can target one
additional creature for each slot leveI above 1st.
MAGEARMOR

1st-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a piece of cured leather)
Duration: 8 hours
Vou touch a willing creature who isn't wearing armor,
and a pratective magical force surrounds it until the
spel1 ends. The target's base AC becomes 13 + its
Dexterity modifier. The spel1 ends if the target dons
armar ar if you dismiss the spell as an action.
MAGE HAND

Conjuration cantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: 1 minute
A spectral, floating hand appears at a point you choose
within range. The hand lasts for the duration ar until
you dismiss it as an action. The hand vanishes if it is
ever more than 30 feet away from you ar if you cast
this spel1 again.
Vou can use your action to contraI the hand. Vou can
use the hand to manipulate an object, open an unlocked
doar ar container, stow or retrieve an item from an open
container, ar pau r the contents out of a via!' Vou can
move the hand up to 30 feet each time you use it.
The hand can't atlack, activate magic items, ar carry
more than 10 pounds.
MAGIC CIRCLE

3rd-Ievel abjuratian
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 10 feet
Components: V,S, M (holy water ar powdered
silver and iron worth at least 100 gp, which the
spel1 consumes)
Duration: 1 hour
Vou create a 10-foot-radius, 20-foot-tal1cylinder of
magical energy centered on a point on the ground
that you can see within range. Glowing runes appear
wherever the cylinder intersects with the lIoor ar
other surface.
Choose one ar more of the following types of
creatures: celestiaIs, elementals, fey,fiends, ar undead.
The circle affects a creature of the chosen type in the
fol1owingways:
The creature can't willingly enter the cylinder by
nonmagical means. If the creature tries to use teleportation ar interplanar traveI to do so, it must first
succeed on a Charisma saving throw.
The creature has disadvantage on attack ral1s against
targets within the cylinder.
Targets within the cylinder can't be charmed, frightened, ar possessed by the creature.

When you cast this spell, you can elect to cause its
magic to opera te in the reverse direction, preventing a
creature of the specified type from leaving the cylinder
and protecting targets outside it.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, the duration increases by
1 hour for each slot levei above 3rd.
MAGICJAR

6th./evel necromancy
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M (a gem, crystal, reliquary, or some
other ornamental container worth at least 500 gp)
Duration: Until dispelled
Your body falls into a catatonic state as your soulleaves
it and enters the container you used for the spell's
material component. While your soul inhabits the
container, you are aware of your surroundings as if you
were in the container's space. Vou can't move or use
reactions. The only action you can take is to project your
soul up to 100 feet out of the container, either returning
to your living body (and ending the spell) or attempting
to possess a humanoids body.
Vou can attempt to possess any humanoid within
100 feet of you that you can see (creatures warded by a
protection [rom evil and good or magic circIe spell can't
be possessed). The target must make a Charisma saving
throw. On a failure, your soul moves into the target's
body, and the target's soul becomes trapped in the
container. On a success, the target resists your efforts
to possess it, and you can't attempt to possess it again
for 24 hours.
Once you possess a creature's body, you control it.
Your game statistics are replaced by the statistics of the
creature, though you retain your alignment and your
Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores. Vou retain
the benefit of your own class features. Ir the target has
any class leveis, you can't use any of its class features.
Meanwhile, the possessed creature's soul can
perceive from the container using its own senses, but it
can't move or take actions at ali.
While possessing a body, you can use your action to
return from the host body to the container if it is within
100 feet of you, returning the host creature's soul to
its body. If the host body dies while you're in it, the
creature dies, and you must make a Charisma saving
throw against your own spellcasting DC. On a success,
you return to the container if it is within 100 feet of you.
Otherwise, you die.
If the container is destroyed or the spell ends, your
soul immediately returns to your body. If your body is
more than 100 feet away from you or ifyour body is
dead when you attempt to return to it, you die. Ir another
creature's soul is in the container when it is destroyed,
the creature's soul returns to its body if the body is alive
and within 100 feet. Otherwise, that creature dies.
When the spell ends, the container is destroyed.

MAGIC MISSILE

Ist./evel evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou create three glowing darts of magical force. Each
dart hits a creature of your choice that you can see
within range. A dart deals Id4 + I force damage to its
target. The darts ali strike simultaneously, and you can
direct them to hit one creature or severa!.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, the spell creates one
more dart for each slot leveI above 1st.
MAGIC MOUTH

2nd./evel iI1usion (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M (a small bit of honeycomb
and jade dust worth at least 10 gp, which the
spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled
Vou implant a message within an object in range, a
message that is uttered when a trigger condition is met.
Choose an object that you can see and that isn't being
worn or carried by another creature. Then speak the
message, which must be 25 words or less, though it
can be delivered over as long as 10 minutes. Finally,
determine the circumstance that will trigger the spell to
deliver your message.
When that circumstance occurs, a magical mouth
appears on the object and recites the message in your
voice and at the same volume you spoke. Ir the object
you chose has a mouth or something that looks like a
mouth (for example, the mouth of a statue), the magical
mouth appears there so that the words appear to come
from the object's mouth. When you cast this spell, you
can have the spell end after it delivers its message, or
it can remain and repeat its message whenever the
trigger occurs.
The triggering circumstance can be as general or as
detailed as you like, though it must be based on visual
or audible conditions that occur within 30 feet of the
object. For example, you could instruct the mouth to
speak when any creature moves within 30 feet of the
object or when a silver bell rings within 30 feet of it.
MAGIC WEAPON

2nd./evel transmutation
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Vou touch a nonmagical weapon. Until the spell ends,
that weapon becomes a magic weapon with a +1 bonus
to attack rolls and damage rolls.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 4th levei or higher, the bonus increases to
+2. When you use a spell slot of 6th leveI or higher, the
bonus increases to +3.
PART 3 I SPELLS

257

MAJOR IMAGE

3rd-Ievel illusion
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a bit of f1eece)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou create the image of an object, a creature, ar some
other visible phenomenon that is no larger than a
20.foot cube. The image appears at a spot that you
can see within range and lasts for the duration. lt
seems completely real, including sounds, smells, and
temperature appropriate to the thing depicted. Vou
can't create sufficient heat or cold to cause damage, a
sound loud enough to deal thunder damage or deafen a
creature, or a smell that might sicken a creature (like a
troglodyte's stench).
As long as you are within range of the illusion, you
can use your action to cause the image to move to
any other spot within range. As the image changes
location, you can alter its appearance so that its
movements appear natural for the image. For example,
if you create an image of a creature and move it, you
can alter the image so that it appears to be walking.
Similarly, you can cause the illusion to make different
sounds at different times, even making it carry on a
conversation, for example.
Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be an
iIlusion, because things can pass through it. A creature
that uses its action to examine the image can determine
that it is an iIlusion with a successfullntelligence
(Investigation) check against your spell save De. lf a
creature discerns the illusion for what it is, the creature
can see through the image, and its other sensory
qualities become faint to the creature.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 6th leveI or higher, the spelllasts until
dispelled, without requiring your concentration.
MASS CURE WOUNDS

5th.level conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
A wave of healing energy washes out from a point of
your choice within range. Choose up to six creatures
in a 30.foot.radius sphere centered on that point. Each
target regains hit points equal to 3d8 + your spellcasting
ability modifier. This spell has no effect on undead
or constructs.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 6th levei or higher, the healing increases by
Id8 for each slot levei above 5th.
MASS HEAL

9th./evel conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: lnstantaneous

PART 3

I SPELLS

A f100dof healing energy f10wsfrom you into injured
creatures around you. Vou restore up to 700 hit points,
divided as you choose among any number of creatures
that you can see within range. Creatures healed by
this spell are also cured of ali diseases and any effect
making them blinded or deafened. This spell has no
effect on undead or constructs.
MASS HEALING

WORD

3rd.level evocation
Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
As you call out words of restoration, up to six creatures
ofyour choice that you can see within range regain hit
points equal to Id4 + your spellcasting ability modifier.
This spell has no effect on undead or constructs.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, the healing increases by
Id4 for each slot levei above 3rd.
MASS SUGGESTION

6th./evel enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V,M (a snake's tongue and either a bit of
honeycomb or a drop of sweet oil)
Duration: 24 hours
Vou suggest a course of activity (limited to a sentence
or two) and magically influence up to twelve creatures
of your choice that you can see within range and that
can hear and understand you. Creatures that can't be
charmed are immune to this effect. The suggestion must
be worded in such a manner as to make the course of
action sound reasonable. Asking the creature to stab
itself, throw itself onto a spear, immolate itself, or do
some other obviously harmful act automatically negates
the effect of the spell.
Each target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a
failed save, it pursues the course of action you described
to the best of its ability. The suggested course of action
can continue for the entire duration. If the suggested
activity can be completed in a shorter time, the spell
ends when the subject finishes what it was asked to do.
Vou can also specify conditions that will trigger a
special activity during the duration. For example, you
might suggest that a group of soldiers give ali their
money to the first beggar they meet. If the condition isn't
met before the spell ends, the activity isn't performed.
lf you or any of your companions damage a creature
affected by this spell, the spell ends for that creature.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using
a 7th.leveI spell slot, the duration is 10 days. When
you use an 8th.level spell slot, the duration is 30 days.
When you use a 9th.level spell slot, the duration is a
year and a day.
MAZE

8th./eveI conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet

Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to \O minutes

MENDING

Vou banish a creature that you can see within range into
a labyrinthine demiplane. The target remains there for
the duration or until it escapes the maze.
The target can use its action to altempt to escape.
When it does so, it makes a DC 20 Intelligence check. If
it succeeds, it escapes, and lhe spell ends (a minotallr or
goristro demon automatically succeeds).
When the spell ends, the target reappears in the
space it left or, if that space is occupied, in the nearest
unoccupied space.

Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: Touch
Components: V. S, M (two lodestones)
Duration: Instantaneous

MELD INTO STONE

3rd-/evel transmutation (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: 8 hours
Vou step into a stone object or surface large enough to
fully contain your body, melding yourself and ali the
equipment you carry with the stone for the dllration.
Using your movement, you step into the stone at a point
you can touch. Nothing of your presence remains visible
or otherwise detectable by nonmagical senses.
While merged with the stone, you can't see what
occurs outside it, and any Wisdom (Perception) checks
you make to hear sounds outside it are made with
disadvantage. Vou remain aware of the passage of
time and can cast spells on yourself while merged in
the stone. Vou can use your movement to leave the
stone where you entered it, which ends the spell. Vou
otherwise can't move.
Minor physical damage to the stone doesn't harm
you, but its partial destruction or a change in its shape
(to the extent that YOllno longer fit within it) expels YOll
and deals 6d6 bludgeoning damage to YOll.The stone's
complete destruction (or transmutation into a different
sllbstance) expels YOlland deals 50 bludgeoning damage
to you. If expelled, you fali prone in an lInoccupied space
cIosest to where you first entered.
MELF'S ACID ARROW

2nd-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V, S, M (powdered rhubarb leaf and an
adder's stomach)
Duration: 1nstantaneous
A shimmering green arrow streaks toward a targel
within range and bllrsts in a spray of acid. Make a
ranged spell attack against the target. On a hit, the
target takes 4d4 acid damage immediately and 2d4 acid
damage aI the end of its next turno On a miss, the arrow
splashes the target with acid for half as much of the
initial damage and no damage at the end of its next turno
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spellllsing a
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, lhe damage (both initial
and later) increases by 1d4 for each slot levei above 2nd.

Transmutation cantrip

This spell repairs a single break or tear in an object
you touch, such as a broken chain link. two halves of
a broken key, a torn c1oak, or a leaking wineskin. As
long as the break or tear is no larger than 1 foot in
any dimension, you mend it. leaving no trace of the
former damage.
This spell can physically repair a magic item
or construct, but the spell can't restore magic to
such an object.
MESSAGE

Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a short piece of copper wire)
Duration: I round
Vou point your finger toward a creature within range
and whisper a message. The target (and only the target)
hears the message and can reply in a whisper that only
you can hear.
Vou can cast this spell through solid objects if you
are familiar with the target and know it is beyond
the barrier. Magical silence, 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of
common metal, a thin sheet of lead, or 3 feet of wood
blocks the spell. The spell doesn't have to follow a
straight line and can travei freely around corners or
throllgh openings.
METEOR SWARM

9th-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 1 mile
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Blazing orbs of fire plummet to the ground at four
different points YOllcan see within range. Each creature
in a 40-foot-radius sphere centered on each point you
choose must make a Dexterity saving throw. The sphere
spreads around corners. A creature takes 20d6 fire
damage and 20d6 bludgeoning damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one. A
creature in lhe area of more than one fiery burst is
affected only once.
The spell damages objects in the area and ignites
flammable objects that aren't being worn or carried.
MIND BLANK

8th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: 24 hOllrs
Unti! the spell ends, one willing creatllre you tOllch is
immune to psychic damage, any effect lhat would sense
PART 3 I SPELLS

259

its emotions or read its thoughts, divination spells, and
the charmed condition. The spell even foils wish spells
and spells or effects of similar power used to affect the
target's mind or to gain information about the target.

the illusion's presence, the creature can still physically
interact with the illusion.
MIRROR

IMAGE

2nd-levei illusion
MINOR

ILLUSION

lIlusion cantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: 5, M (a bit of fleece)
Duration: 1 minute
Vou create a sound or an image of an object within
range that lasts for the duration. The illusion also ends if
you dismiss it as an action or cast this spell again.
lf you create a sound, its volume can range from a
whisper to a scream. It can be your voice, someone
else's voice, a lion's roar, a beating of drums, or any
other sound you choose. The sound continues unabated
throughout the duration, or you can make discrete
sounds at different times before the spell ends.
lf you create an image of an object-such as a chair,
muddy footprints, or a small chest-it must be no larger
than a 5-foot cube. The image can't create sound, light,
smell, or any other sensory effect. Physical interaction
with the image reveals it to be an illusion, because
things can pass through it.
lf a creature uses its action to examine the sound or
image, the creature can determine that it is an illusion
with a successful Intelligence (Investigation) check
against your spell save De. If a creature discerns the
illusion for what it is, the illusion becomes faint to
the creature.
MIRAGE ARCANE

7th-levei illusion
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 5ight
Components: V,5
Duration: 10 days
Vou make terrain in an area up to 1 mile square
look, sound, smell, and even feellike some other sort
of terrain. The terrain's general shape remains the
same, however. Open fields or a road could be ma de to
resemble a swamp, hill, crevasse, or some other difficult
or impassable terrain. A pond can be made to seem like
a grassy meadow, a precipice like a gentle slope, or a
rock-strewn gully like a wide and smooth road.
5imilarly, you can alter the appearance of structures,
or add them where none are present. The spell doesn't
disguise, conceal, or add creatures.
The illusion includes audible, visual, tactile, and
olfactory elements, so it can turn clear ground into
difficult terrain (or vice versa) or otherwise impede
movement through the area. Any piece of the illusory
terrain (such as a rock or stick) that is removed from the
spell's area disappears immediately.
Creatures with truesight can see through the illusion
to the terrain's true form; however, ali other elements
of the illusion remain, so while the creature is aware of

260

PART 3

I SPELLS

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 5elf
Components: V,5
Duration: 1 minute
Three illusory duplicates of yourself appear in your
space. Until the spell ends, the duplicates move with
you and mimic your actions, shifting position so it's
impossible to track which image is real. Vou can use
your action to dismiss the illusory duplicates.
Each time a creature targets you with an attack during
the spell's duration, roll a d20 to determine whether the
attack instead targets one of your duplicates.
lf you have three duplicates, you must roll a 6 or
higher to change the attack's target to a duplicate. With
two duplicates, you must roll an 8 or higher. With one
duplicate, you must roll an 11 or higher.
A duplicate's AC equals 10 + your Dexterity modifier.
If an attack hits a duplicate, the duplicate is destroyed. A
duplicate can be destroyed only by an attack that hits it.
It ignores ali other damage and effects. The spell ends
when ali three duplicates are destroyed.
A creature is unaffected by this spell if it can't see, if it
relies on senses other than sight, such as blindsight, or
if it can perceive illusions as false, as with truesight.
MISLEAD

5th-levei illusion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 5elf
Components: 5
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Vou become invisible at the same time that an illusory
double of you appears where you are standing. The
double lasts for the duration, but the invisibility ends if
you attack or cast a spell.
Vou can use your action to move your illusory double
up to twice your speed and make it gesture, speak, and
behave in whatever way you choose.
Vou can see through its eyes and hear through its ears
as if you were located where it is. On each of your turns
as a bonus action, you can switch from using its senses
to using your own, or back again. While you are using its
senses, you are blinded and deafened in regard to your
own surroundings.
MISTY STEP

2nd-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: 5elf
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Briefly surrounded by silvery mist, you teleport up to 30
feet to an unoccupied space that you can see.

MODIFY MEMORY

5th-leveI enehantment
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Coneentration, up to I minute
Vou attempt to reshape another ereature's memories.
One ereature that you ean see must make a Wisdom
saving throw. If you are fighting the ereature, it has
advantage on the saving throw. On a failed save, the
target beeomes eharmed by you for the duration. The
eharmed target is ineapacitated and unaware of its
surroundings, though it ean still hear you. If it takes any
damage or is targeted by another spell, this spell ends,
and none of the target's memories are modified.
While this eharm lasts, you ean affeet the target's
memory of an event that it experieneed within the last
24 hours and that lasted no more than 10 minutes. Vou
ean permanently eliminate ali memory of the event,
allow the target to reeall the event with perfeet c!arity
and exaeting detail, ehange its memory of the details of
the event, or ereate a memory of some other event.
Vou must speak to the target to deseribe how
its memories are affeeted, and it must be able to
understand your language for the modified memories to
take root. Its mind fills in any gaps in the details of your
description. If the spell ends before you have fin ished
describing the modified memories, the creature's
memory isn't altered. Otherwise, the modified memories
take hold when the spell ends.
A modified memory doesn't neeessarily affect how a
creature behaves, particularly if the memory contradicts
the creature's natural inc!inations, alignment, or beliefs.
An illogical modified memory, such as implanting a
memory of how much the creature enjoyed dousing
itself in acid, is dismissed, perhaps as a bad dream. The
DM might deem a modified memory toa nonsensical to
affect a creature in a significant manner.
A remove eurse or greater restoration spell cast on the
target restores the creature's true memory.
At Higher LeveIs. If you east this spell using a spell
slot of 6th leveI or higher, you can alter the target's
memories of an event that took place up to 7 days ago
(6th levei), 30 days ago (7th levei), I year ago (8th levei),
or any time in the creature's past (9th levei).
MOONBEAM

2nd-leveI evoeation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, 5, M (severa I seeds of any moonseed
plant and a pieee of opaleseent feldspar)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
A silvery beam of pale light shines down in a 5-footradius, 40-foot-high cylinder centered on a point within
range. Until the spell ends, dim light fills the cylinder.
When a creature enters the spell's area for the first
time on aturo or starts its turo there, it is engulfed
in ghostly liames that cause searing pain, and it must
make a Constitution saving throw. It takes 2dlO radiant

damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successfu I one.
A shapechanger makes its saving throw with
disadvantage. Ir it fails, it also instantly reverts to its
original form and can't assume a different form until it
leaves the spell's light.
On each of your turos after you cast this spell, you can
use an action to move the beam 60 feet in any direction.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the damage increases by
ldlO for each slot leveI above 2nd.
MORDENKAINEN'S

FAITHFUL

HOUND

4th-leveI eorijuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, 5, M (a tiny silver whistle, a pieee of
bone, and a thread)
Duration: 8 hours
Vou conjure a phantom watchdog in an unoccupied
space that you can see within range, where it remains
for the duration, until you disrniss it as an action, or until
you move more than 100 feet away from it.
The hound is invisible to ali creatures except you
and can't be harmed. When a 5mall or larger creature
comes within 30 feet of it without first speaking the
password that you specify when you cast this spell, the
hound starts barking loudly. The hound sees invisible
creatures and can see into the Ethereal Plane. It
ignores illusions.
At the start of each of your turos, the hound attempts
to bite one creature within 5 feet of it that is hostile
to you. The hound's attack bonus is equal to your
spellcasting ability modifier + your proficiency bonus.
On a hit, it deals 4d8 piercing damage.
MORDENKAINEN'S

MAGNIFICENT

MANSION

7th-leveI eonjuration
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 300 feet
Components: V, 5, M (a miniature portal carved from
ivory, a small piece of polished marble, and a tiny
silver spoon, each item worth at least 5 gp)
Duration: 24 hours
Vou conjure an extradimensional dwelling in range
that lasts for the duration. Vou choose where its one
entrance is located. The entrance shimmers faintly
and is 5 feet wide and 10 feet tall. Vou and any creature
you designate when you cast the spell can enter the
extradimensional dwelling as long as the portal remains
open. Vou can open or c!ose the portal if you are within
30 feet of it. While c!osed, the portal is invisible.
Beyond the portal is a rnagnificent foyer with
numerous ehambers beyond. The atmosphere is c!ean,
fresh, and warm.
Vou can create any 1I00r plan you like, but the space
can't exceed 50 cubes, each cube being 10 feet on
each side. The place is furoished and decorated as
you choose. lt contains sufficient food to serve a ninecourse banquet for up to 100 people. A staff of 100
near-transparent servants attends ali who enter. Vou

PART 3

SPELLS

261

decide the visual appearance of these servants and their
attire. They are completely obedient to your orders.
Each servant can perform any task a normal human
servant could perform, but they can't attack or take
any action that would directly harm another creature.
Thus the servants can fetch things, clean, mend, fold
clothes. light tires. serve food, pour wine, and so on.
The servants can go anywhere in the mansion but
can't leave it. Furnishings and other objects created
by this spell dissipate into smoke if removed from the
mansion. When the spell ends, any creatures inside
the extradimensional space are expelled into the open
spaces nearest to the entrance.
MORDENKAINEN'S

PRIVATE SANCTUM

4th.level abjuration
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a thin sheet of lead, a piece
of opaque glass. a wad of cotton or cloth, and
powdered chrysolite)
Duration: 24 hours
Vou make an area within range magically secure. The
area is a cube that can be as small as 5 feet to as large
as 100 feel on each side. The spelllasts for the duralion
or unlil you use an aclion to dismiss it.
When you cast the spell, you decide whal sorl of
securily the spell provides, choosing any or ali of the
following properties:
Sound can't pass through lhe barrier aI the edge of
the warded area.
The barrier of the warded area appears dark and foggy,
preventing vision (including darkvision) through il.
Sensors created by divinalion spells can't appear
inside the protected area or pass through the barrier
aI ils peri meter.
Creatures in the area can't be targeted by divinalion
spells.
Nothing can teleport into or oul of lhe warded area.
Planar traveI is blocked within the warded area.
Casling this spell on the same spot every day for a
year makes this effect permanent.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slol of 5th levei or higher, you can increase the size
of the cube by 100 feet for each slot leveI beyond 4th.
Thus you could protect a cube that can be up lO 200 feet
on one side by using a spell slot of 5th leveI.
MORDENKAINEN'S

SWORD

7th-Je.-elevocalion
Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 60 feet
Componenls: V. 5, M (a minialure platinum sword wilh
a grip and pommel of copper and zinc, worth 250 gp)
Duration: Concentralion, up to 1 minute
Vou create a sword-shaped plane of force that hovers
within range. It lasts for the duration.
When the sword appears, you make a melee spell
attack against a targel ofyour choice within 5 feet ofthe
sword. On a hit. the target takes 3d 10 force damage.

PA RT 3

I SPELLS

Until the spell ends, you can use a bonus action on each
of your turns to move the sword up to 20 feet to a spot
you can see and repeat this attack against the same
target or a different one.
MOVE EARTH

6th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (an iron blade and a small bag
containing a mixture of soils-c1ay, loam, and sand)
Duration: Concentration, up to 2 hours
Choose an area of terrain no larger than 40 feet on a
side within range. Vou can reshape dirt, sand, or c1ay
in the area in any manner you choose for the duration.
Vou can raise or lower the area's e1evation, create or fill
in a trench, erect or f1atten a wall, or form a pillar. The
extent of any such changes can't exceed half the area's
largest dimensiono So, if you affect a 40-foot square,
you can create a pillar up to 20 feet high, raise or lower
the square's e1evation by up to 20 feet, dig a trench up
to 20 feet deep, and so on. It takes 10 minutes for these
changes to complete.
At the end of every 10 minutes you spend
concentrating on the spell, you can choose a new area of
terrain to affecl.
Because the terrain's transformation occurs slowly,
creatures in the area can't usually be trapped or injured
by the ground's movemenl.
This spell can't manipulate natural stone or
stone construction. Rocks and structures shift to
accommodate the new terrain. Ir the way you shape
the terrain would make a structure unstable, it
might collapse.
Similarly, this spell doesn't directly affect plant
growth. The moved earth carries any plants along with il.
NONDETECTlON

3rd-Ievel abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of diamond dust
worth 25 gp sprinkled over the target, which the
spell consumes)
Duration: 8 hours
For the duration, you hide a target that you touch
from divination magic. The target can be a willing
creature or a place or an object no larger than 10
feet in any dimensiono The target can't be targeted by
any divination magic or perceived through magical
scrying sensors.
NYSTUL'S MAGIC AURA

2nd-leveI illusion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a small square of silk)
Duration: 24 hours

Vou place an illusion on a creature or an object
you touch so that divination spells reveal false
information about il. The target can be a willing
creature or an object that isn't being carried or worn by
another creature.
When you cast the spell, choose one or both of the
following effects. The effect lasts for the duration. Ir you
cast this spell on the same creature or object every day
for 30 days, placing the same effect on It each time, the
illusion lasts until it is dispelled.
False Aura. Vou change the way the target appears
to spells and magical effects, such as detect magic,
that detect magical auras. Vou can make a nonmagical
object appear magical, a magical object appear
nonmagical, or change the object's magical aura so that
it appears to belong to a specific school of magic that
you choose. When you use lhis effect on an object, you
can make the false magic apparent to any creature that
handles the item.
Mask. Vou change the way the target appears to spells
and magical effects that detect creature types, such as a
paladin's Divine Sense or the trigger of a symbol spe11.
Vou choose a creature type and other spells and magical
effects treat the target as if it were a creature of that
type or of that alignmenl.
OTlLUKE'S

FREEZING SPHERE

6th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 300 feet
Components: V, S, M (a small crystal sphere)
Duration: Instantaneous
A frigid globe of cold energy streaks from your fingertips
to a point of your choice within range, where it explodes
in a 60-foot-radius sphere. Each creature within the
area must make a Constitution saving throw. On a
failed save, a creature takes IOd6 cold damage. On a
successful save, it takes half as much damage.
Ir the globe strikes a body of water or a liquid that is
principally water (not inc1uding water-based creatures),
it freezes the liquid to a depth of 6 inches over an area
30 feet square. This ice lasts for I minute. Creatures
that were swimming on the surface of frozen water are
trapped in the ice. A trapped creature can use an action
to make a Strength check against your spell save DC
to brea k free.
Vou can refrain from firing the globe after completing
lhe spcll, if you wish. A small globe about the size of
a sling stone, cool to the touch, appears in your hand.
At any time, you or a creature you give the globe to
can throw the globe (to a range of 40 feet) or hurl it
with a sling (to the sling's normal range). It shatlers
on impact, with lhe same effect as the normal casting
of the spell. Vou can also set the globe down without
shattering il. After 1 minute, if the globe hasn't already
shattered, it explodes.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 7th levei or higher, lhe damage increases by
ld6 for each slot levei above 6th.

?ART 3

S?ELLS

OTILUKE'S

RESILIENT

SPHERE

4th-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (a hemispherical piece of
clear crystal and a matching hemispherical piece
of gum arabic)
Duration: Concentration. up to I minute
A sphere of shimmering force encloses a creature
ar object of Large size ar smaller within range. An
unwilling creature must make a Dexterity saving
throw. On a failed save. the creature is enclosed for
the duration.
Nothing-not physical objects. energy. ar other spell
effects-can pass through the barrier. in ar out. though
a creature in the sphere can breathe there. The sphere
is immune to ali damage. and a creature or object inside
can't be damaged by attacks or effects originating from
outside, nor can a creature inside the sphere damage
anything outside it.
The sphere is weightless and just large enough to
contain the creature or object inside. An enclosed
creature can use its action to push against the sphere's
walls and thus roll the sphere at up to half the creature's
speed. Similarly, the globe can be picked up and moved
by other creatures.
A disintegrate spell targeting the globe destroys it
without harming anything inside it.
OTTO'S

IRRESISTIBLE

DANCE

6th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V
Duration: Concentration. up to I minute
Choose one creature that you can see within range. The
target begins a comic dance in place: shuffling, tapping
its feet, and capering for the duration. Creatures that
can't be charmed are immune to this spell.
A dancing creature must use ali its movement to
dance without leaving its space and has disadvantage
on Dexterity saving throws and attack rolls. While
the target is affected by this spell, other creatures
have advantage on attack rolls against it. As an
action, a dancing creature makes a Wisdom saving
throw to regain control of itself. On a successful save.
the spell ends.
PASS WITHOUT

TRACE

2nd-levei abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V.S, M (ashes from a burned leaf of
mistletoe anel a sprig of spruce)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
A veil of shadows and silence radiates from you,
masking you and your companions from detection.
For the duration. each creature you choose within 30
feet of you (including you) has a +10 bonus to Dexterity

PART 3

I SPELLS

(Stealth) checks and can't be tracked except by magical
means. A creature that receives this bonus leaves
behind no tracks ar other traces of its passage.
PASSWALL

5th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V.S. M (a pinch of sesame seeds)
Duration: I hour
A passage appears at a point of your choice that you
can see on a wooden. plaster. or stone surface (such as
a wall, a ceiling, or a floor) within range, and lasts for
the duration. Vou choose the opening's dimensions: up
to 5 feet wide. 8 feet tall, and 20 feet deep. The passage
creates no instability in a structure surrounding it.
When the opening disappears, any creatures or
objects still in the passage created by the spell are safely
ejected to an unoccupied space nearest to the surface on
which you cast the spell.
PHANTASMAL

FORCE

2nd-levei i11usion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V.S. M (a bit of fleece)
Duration: Concentration. up to I minute
Vou craft an illusion that takes root in the mind of a
creature that you can see within range. The target must
make an Intelligence saving throw. On a failed save, you
create a phantasmal object, creature. or other visible
phenomenon of your choice that is no larger than a
lO-foot cube and that is perceivable only to the target
for the duration. This spell has no effect on undead
ar constructs.
The phantasm includes sound, temperature. and other
stimuli, also evident only to the creature.
The target can use its action to examine the phantasm
with an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your
spell save DC. If the check succeeds, the target realizes
that the phantasm is an illusion, and the spell ends.
While a target is affected by the spell, the target treats
the phantasm as if it were real. The target rationalizes
any illogical outcomes from interacting with the
phantasm. For example. a target attempting to walk
across a phantasmal bridge that spans a chasm falls
once it steps anta the bridge. ]f the target survives the
fali, it still believes that the bridge exists and comes up
with some other explanation for its fall-it was pushed,
it slipped, ar a strong wind might have knocked it off.
An affected target is so convinced of the phantasm's
reality that it can even take damage from the illusion. A
phantasm created to appear as a creature can attack the
target. Similarly. a phantasm created to appear as tire. a
pool of acid. ar lava can burn the target. Each round on
your turn. the phantasm can deal Id6 psychic damage
to the target if it is in the phantasm's area ar within 5
feet of the phantasm, provided that the illusion is of a
creature ar hazard that could logically deal damage.
such as by attacking. The target perceives the damage
as a type appropriate to the illusion.

PHANTASMAL KILLER

4th-leveI illusion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Vou tap into the nightmares of a creature you can see
within range and create an illusory manifestation of its
deepest fears, visible only to that creature. The target
must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save,
the target becomes frightened for the duration. At the
start of each of the target's turns before the spell ends,
the target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw
ar take 4d 10 psychic damage. On a successful save,
the spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 5th levei ar higher, the damage increases by
ldlO for each slot levei above 4th.
PHANTOM STEED

3rd-/evel iIIusion (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: 1 hour
A Large quasi-real, horselike creature appears on
the ground in an unoccupied space ofyour choice
within range. Vou decide the creature's appearance,
but it is equipped with a saddle, bit. and bridle. Any
of the equipment created by the spell vanishes in a
puff of smoke if it is carried more than 10 feet away
from the steed.
For the duration, you or a creature you choose can
ride the steed. The creature uses the statistics for a
riding horse, except it has a speed of 100 feet and can
travei 10 miles in an hour, or 13 miles at a fast pace.
When the spell ends. the steed gradually fades. giving
the rider 1 minute to dismount. The spell ends if you use
an action to dismiss it ar if the steed takes any damage.
PLANARALLY

6th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou beseech an otherworldly entity for aid. The being
must be known to you: a god. a primordial, a demon
prince, ar some other being of cosmic power. That entity
sends a celestial, an elemental. ar a fiend loyal to it to
aid you, making the creature appear in an unoccupied
space within range. Ifyou know a specific crcature's
name. you can speak that name when you cast this spell
to request that creature, though you might get a different
creature anyway (DM's choice).
When the creature appears. it is under no compulsion
to behave in any particular way. Vou can ask the
creature to perform a service in exchange for payment,
but it isn't obligcd to do so. The rcquested task could
range from simple (fly us across the chasm, or hclp us
fight a battle) to complex (spy on our enemies. or protect

us during our foray into the dungeon). Vou must be
abJe to communicate with the creature to bargain for
its services.
Payment can take a variety of forms. A celestial might
require a sizable donation of gold ar magic items to
an allied temple. while a fiend might demand a living
sacrifice or a gift of treasure. Some creatures might
exchange their service for a quest undertaken by you.
As a rule of thumb, a task that can be measured in
minutes requires a payment worth 100 gp per minute. A
task measured in hours requires 1,000 gp per hour. And
a task measured in days (up to 10 days) requires 10.000
gp per day. The DM can adjust these payments based on
the circumstances under which you cast the spel!. If the
task is aligned with the creature's ethos, the payment
might be halved or even waived. Nonhazardous tasks
typically require only half the suggested payment, while
especially dangerous tasks might require a greater gift.
Creatures rarely accept tasks that seem suicida!'
After the creature completes the task, or when the
agreed-upon duration of service expires, the creature
returns to its home plane after reporting back to you.
if appropriate to the task and if possible. ]f you are
unable to agree on a price for the creature's service, the
creature immediately returns to its home plane.
A creature enlisted to join your group counts as
a member of it, receiving a full share of experience
points awarded.
PLANAR BINDING

5th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1 hour
Range: 60 feet
Components: V. S. M (a jewel worth at least 1.000 gP.
which the spell consumes)
Duration: 24 hours
With this spell, you attempt to bind a celestial. an
ele mental. a fey. or a fiend to your service. The creature
must be within range for the entire casting of the spel!.
(Typically. the creature is first summoned into the center
of an inverted magie eircle in arder to keep it trapped
while this spell is cast.) At the completion of the casting,
the target must make a Charisma saving throw. On a
failed save, it is bound to serve you for the duration. If
the creature was summoned ar created by another spell.
that spell's duration is extended to match the duration
of this spel!.
A bound creature must follow your instructions to the
best of its ability. Vou might command the creature to
accompany you on an adventure. to guard a location. or
to deliver a message. The creature obeys the letter of
your instructions. but if the creature is hostil e to you. it
strives to twist your words to achieve its own objectives.
]f the creature carries out your instructions completely
before the spell ends, it travels to you to report this fact
if you are on the same plane of existence. If you are on a
different plane of existence. it returns to the place where
you bound it and remains there until the spell ends.
At Higher Leve/s. When YOllcast this spellllsing a
spell slot of a higher levei, the duration increases to 10
days with a 6th-levei slot, to 30 days with a 7th-levei slot.
to 180 days with an 8th-levei slot. and to a year and a
day with a 9th-levei spell slot.
PART

3 I SPELLS

PLANE SHIFT

7th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a forked, metal rod worth at least
250 gp, attuned to a particular plane of existence)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou and up to eight willing creatures who link hands in
a circle are transported to a different plane of existence.
Vou can specify a target destination in general terms,
such as the City of Brass on the Elemental Plane of
Fire or the palace of Dispater on the second levei of the
Nine Hells, and you appear in or near that destination.
Ir you are trying to reach the City of Brass, for example,
you might arrive in its Street of Steel, before its Gate of
Ashes, or looking at the city from across the Sea of Fire,
at the DM's discretion.
Alternatively, if you know the sigil sequence of a
teleportation circle on another plane of existence, this
spell can take you to that circle. Ir the teleportation
circle is too small to hold ali the creatures you
transported, they appear in the closest unoccupied
spaces next to the circle.
Vou can use this spell to banish an unwilling creature
to another plane. Choose a creature within your reach
and make a melee spell attack against it. On a hit, the
creature must make a Charisma saving throw. Ir the
creature fails this save, it is transported to a random
location on the plane of existence you specify. A creature
so transported must find its own way back to your
current plane of existence.
PLANT GROWTH

3rd-/evel transmutation
Casting Time: I action or 8 hours
Range: 150 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: lnstantaneous
This spell channels vitality into plants within a specific
area. There are two possible uses for the spell, granting
either immediate or long-term benefits.
If you cast this spell using I action, choose a point
within range. Ali normal plants in a 100-foot radius
centered on that point become thick and overgrown. A
creature moving through the area must spend 4 feet of
movement for every I foot it moves.
Vou can exclude one or more areas of any size within
the spell's area from being affected.
If you cast this spell over 8 hours, you enrich the
land. Ali plants in a half-mile radius centered on a point
within range beco me enriched for I year. The plants
yield twice the normal amount of food when harvested.

Vou extend your hand toward a creature you can see
within range and project a puff of noxious gas from your
paIm. The creature must succeed on a Constitution
saving throw ar take Idl2 poison damage.
This spell's damage increases by Idl2 when you reach
5th leveI (2dI2), 11th levei (3dI2), and 17th leveI (4dI2).
POLYMORPH

4th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S, M (a caterpillar cocoon)
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
This spell transforms a creature that you can see
within range into a new formoAn unwilling creature
must make a Wisdom saving throw to avoid the
effect. A shapechanger automatically succeeds on this
saving throw.
The transformation lasts for the duration, or until
the target drops to O hit points ar dies. The new form
can be any beast whose challenge rating is equal to or
less than the target's (or the target's leveI, if it doesn't
have a challenge rating). The target's game statistics,
including mental ability scores, are replaced by the
statistics of the chosen beast. It retains its alignment
and personality.
The target assumes the hit points of its new formo
When it reverts to its normal form, the creature
returns to the number of hit points it had before it
transformed. If it reverts as a result of dropping to
O hit points, any excess damage carries over to its
normal formoAs long as the excess damage doesn't
reduce the creature's normal form to O hit points, it isn't
knocked unconscious.
The creature is limited in the actions it can perform by
the nature of its new form, and it can't speak, cast spells,
ar take any other action that requires hands ar speech.
The target's gear melds into the new formoThe
creature can't activate, use, wield, or otherwise benefit
from any of its equipment.
POWER WORD HEAL

9th-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
A wave of healing energy washes over the creature
you touch. The target regains ali its hit points. If the
creature is charmed, frightened, paralyzed, ar stunned,
the condition ends. If the creature is prone, it can use its
reaction to stand up. This spell has no effect on undead
ar constructs.

POISON SPRAY

Conjuration cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 10 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: Instantaneous

266

PART 3 I SPELLS

POWER WORD KILL

9th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous

Vou utter a word of power that can compel one creature
you can see within range to die instantly. lf the
creature you choose has 100 hit points or fewer. it dies.
Otherwise. the spell has no effect.
POWER WORD STUN

8th-levei enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou speak a word of power that can overwhelm the
mind of one creature you can see within range. leaving
it dumbfounded. lf the target has 150 hit points or fewer.
it is stunned. Otherwise. the spell has no effect.
The stunned target must make a Constitution saving
thraw at the end of each of its turns. On a successful
save. this stunning effect ends.
PRAYER OF HEALING

2nd-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: 30 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Up to six creatures of your choice that you can see
within range each regain hit points equal to 2d8 + your
spellcasting ability moditier. This spell has no effect on
undead or constructs.
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher. the healing increases by
ld8 for each slot leveI above 2nd.
PRESTIDIGITATION

Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 10 feet
Components: V.S
Duration: Up to I hour
This spell is a minor magical trick that novice
spellcasters use for practice. Vou create one of the
following magical effects within range:
Vou create an instantaneous. harmless sensory effect.
such as a shower of sparks. a puff of wind. faint musical notes. or an odd odor.
Vou instantaneously light or snuff out a candle. a
torch. or a small camptire.
Vou instantaneously dean or soil an object no larger
than 1 cubic fool.
Vou chill. warm. or flavor up to I cubic foot of nonliving material for I hour.
Vou make a color. a small mark. or a symbol appear
on an object ar a surface for I hour.
Vou create a nonmagical trinket or an iIlusory image
that can tit in your hand and that lasts until the end of
your next turno
lfyou cast this spell multiple times. YOll can have IIp to
three of its non-instantaneous effects aclive at a time.
and you can dismiss such an effect as an action.

PRISMATIC SPRAY

7th.level evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self (60-foot cone)
Components: V.S
Duration: Instantaneous
Eight multicolored rays of light flash fram your hand.
Each ray is a different color and has a different power
and purpose. Each creature in a 60-foot cone must
make a Dexterity saving thraw. For each target. roll a d8
to determine which color ray affects il.
1. Red. The target takes IOd6 tire damage on a failed
save. or half as much damage on a successful one.
2. Orange. The target takes IOd6 acid damage on a
failed save. or half as much damage on a successful one.
3. Yellow. The target takes IOd6lightning damage on a
failed save. or half as much damage on a successful one.
4. Green. The target takes IOd6 poison damage on a
failed save. or half as much damage on a successful one.
5. B/ue. The target takes IOd6 cold damage on a failed
save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
6.Indigo. On a failed save. the target is restrained.
lt must then make a Constitution saving thraw at the
end of each of its turns. If it successfully saves three
times. the spell ends. If it fails its save three times.
it permanently turns to stone and is subjected to the
petritied condition. The successes and failures don't
need to be consecutive; keep track of both until the
target collects three of a kind.
7. Vio/et, On a failed save, the target is blinded. lt
must then make a Wisdom saving throw at the start of
your next turno A successful save ends the blindness. lf
it fails that save, the creature is transported to another
plane of existence of the DM's choosing and is no longer
blinded. (Typically, a creature that is on a plane that isn't
its home plane is banished home. while other creatures
are usually cast into the Astral or Ethereal planes.)
8. Specia/. The target is struck by two rays. Roll twice
more, rerolling any 8.
PRISMATIC WALL

9th-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V. S
Duration: 10 minutes
A shimmering, multicolored plane of light forms a
vertical opaque wall-up to 90 feet long. 30 feet high.
and I inch thick-centered on a point you can see
within range. Alternatively, you can shape the wall into
a sphere up to 30 feet in dia meter centered on a point
you choose within range. The wall remains in place for
the duration.lfyou position the wall so that it passes
through a space occupied by a creature. the spell fails.
and your action and the spell slot are wasted.
The wall sheds bright light out to a range of 100
feet and dim light for an additional 100 feel. Vou and
creatures you designate at the lime you cast the spell
can pass through and remain near the wall without
harm. If another creature that can see the wall moves to
within 20 feet of it or starts its tum there. the creature
PART 3

I SPELLS

must succeed 00 a Coostitutioo saviog throw or become
blioded for I mioute.
The wall coosists of seveo layers. each with a differeot
color. Wheo a creature attempts to reach ioto or pass
through the wall, it does so ooe layer at a time through
ali the wall's layers. As it passes or reaches through
each layer, the creature must make a Dexterity saviog
throw or be affected by that layer's properties as
described below.
The wall cao be destroyed, also ooe layer at a time, io
order from red to violet, by meaos specific to each layer.
Ooce a layer is destroyed, it remaios so for the duratioo
of the spell. A rod of cancellation destroys a prismatic
wall, but ao antimagic field has 00 effect 00 it.
1. Red. The creature takes IOd6 fire damage 00 a
failed save, or half as much damage 00 a successful ooe.
While this layer is io place, ooomagical raoged attacks
cao't pass through the wall. The layer cao be destroyed
by dealiog at least 25 cold damage to it.
2. Orange. The creature takes IOd6 acid damage 00
a failed save, or half as much damage 00 a successful
ooe. While this layer is io place, magical raoged attacks
cao't pass through the wall. The layer is destroyed by
a stroog wiod.
3. YeJIow. The creature takes lOd6 lightoiog damage
00 a failed save, or half as much damage 00 a successful
ooe. This layer cao be destroyed by dealiog at least 60
force damage to it.
4. Green. The creature takes lOd6 poisoo damage 00
a failed save, ar half as much damage 00 a successful
ooe. A passwall spell, or aoother spell of equal or
greater levei that cao opeo a portal 00 a solid surface,
destrays this layer.
5. Blue. The creature takes IOd6 cold damage 00 a
failed save, or half as much damage 00 a successful ooe.
This layer cao be destroyed by dealiog at least 25 fire
damage to it.
6. Jndigo. 00 a failed save, the creature is restraioed.
11 must theo make a Coostitutiao saviog throw at the
eod of each of its turns. lf it successfully saves three
times, the spell eods. lf it fails its save three times,
it permaoeotly turos to stooe aod is subjected to the
petrified cooditioo. The successes aod failures doo't
need to be coosecutive; keep track of both uotil the
creature collects three of a kiod.
While this layer is io place, spells cao't be cast
through the wall. The layer is destroyed by bright light
shed by a day/ight spell or a similar spell of equal or
higher leveI.
7. Violet. 00 a failed save, the creature is blioded. 11
must theo make a Wisdom saviog throw at the start of
your oext turno A successful save eods the bliodoess. lf
it fails that save, the creature is traosported to aoother
plaoe of the DM's choosiog aod is 00 looger blioded.
(Typically,a creature that is 00 a plaoe that iso't its
home plaoe is baoished home, while other creatures
are usually cast ioto the Astral or Ethereal plaoes.) This
layer is destroyed bya dispel magic spell or a similar
spell of equal or higher leveI that cao eod spells aod
magical effects.

PRODUCE

FLAME

Conjuration cantrip
Casting Time: I actioo
Range:Self
Components: V,S
Duration: lO mioutes
A flickeriog flame appears io your hand. The flame
remaios there for the duration aod harms oeither you
oor your equipmeot. The flame sheds bright light in a
10-foot radius aod dim light for an additiooal 10 feet.
The spell ends if you dismiss it as ao action or if you
cast it again.
Vou cao also attack with the flame, although doing so
eods the spell. Wheo you cast this spell, or as ao action
00 a later turn, you cao hurl the flame at a creature
withio 30 feet of you. Make a raoged spell attack. 00 a
hit, the target takes Id8 fire damage.
This spell's damage iocreases by Id8 wheo you reach
5th levei (2d8), 11th levei (3d8), aod 17th levei (4d8).
PROGRAMMED

ILLUSION

6th.level illusion
Casting Time: I actioo
Range: 120 feet
Components: V,S, M (a bit of fleece and jade dust worth
at least 25 gp)
Duration: Until dispelled
Vou create ao ilIusioo of ao object, a creature, ar
some other visible pheoomeooo within raoge that
activates wheo a specific cooditioo occurs. The ilIusioo
is imperceptible uotil theo. 11 must be 00 larger thao a
30-foot cube, aod you decide wheo you cast the spell
how the illusioo behaves aod what souods it makes. This
scripted performaoce cao last up to 5 mioutes.
Wheo the cooditioo you specify occurs, the illusioo
spriogs ioto existeoce aod performs io the maooer you
described. Ooce the ilIusioo fioishes performiog, it
disappears aod remaios dormaot for 10 mioutes. After
this time, the ilIusioo cao be activated agaio.
The triggeriog cooditioo cao be as geoeral or as
detailed as you like, though it must be based 00 visual or
audible cooditioos that occur withio 30 feet of the area.
For example, you could create ao illusioo of yourself
to appear aod warn off others who attempt to opeo a
trapped door, or you could set the illusioo to trigger ooly
wheo a creature says the correct word or phrase.
Physical ioteractioo with the image reveals it to be ao
illusioo, because thiogs cao pass through it. A creature
that uses its actioo to examioe the image cao determioe
that it is ao illusioo with a successfullotelligeoce
(f ovestigatioo) check agaiost your spell save DC. lf a
creature discerns the illusioo for what it is, the creature
cao see through the image, aod aoy noise it makes
souods hollow to the creature.

PART 3 I SPELLS

PROJECT IMAGE

PROTECTlON

7th-levei iIlusion

2nd-levei abjuration

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 500 miles
Components: V,S, M (a small replica of you made from
materiais worth at least 5 gp)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 day

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: I hour

Vou create an illusory copy of yourself that lasts for
the duration. The copy can appear at any location
within range that you have seen before, regardless of
intervening obstacles. The illusion Iooks and sounds
like you but is intangible. Ir the illusion takes any
damage, it disappears, and the spell ends.
Vou can use your action to move this illusion up to
twice your speed, and make it gesture, speak, and
behave in whatever way you choose. It mimics your
mannerisms perfectly.
Vou can see through its eyes and hear through its
ears as if you were in its space. On your turn as a bonus
action, you can switch from using its senses to using
your own, or back again. While you are using its senses,
you are blinded and deafened in regard to your own
surroundings.
Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be an
illusion, because things can pass through it. A creature
that uses its action to examine the image can determine
that it is an illusion with a successful Intelligence
(Investigation) check against your spell save DC. If a
creature discerns the illusion for what it is, the creature
can see through the image, and any noise it makes
sounds hollow to the creature.
PROTECTION

FROM ENERGY

3rd-/evel abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
For the duration, the willing creature you touch has
resistance to one damage type of your choice: acid, cold,
fire, lightning, or thunder.
PROTECTION

FROM EVIL AND GOOD

1st-levei abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (holy water or powdered silver
and iron, which the spell consumes)
Duration: Concentration up to 10 minutes
Until the spell ends, one willing creature you
touch is protected against certain types of
creatures: aberrations, celestiais, elementals, fey,
fiends, and undead.
The protection grants several benefits. Creatures of
those types have disadvantage on attack rolls against
the targel. The target also can't be charmed, frightened,
or possessed by them. Ir the target is already charmed,
frightened, or possessed by such a creature, the target
has advantage on any new saving throw against the
relevant effecl.

PART 3

270

I SPELLS

FROM POISON

Vou touch a creature. If it is poisoned, you neutralize the
poison, If more than one poison afllicts the target, you
neutralize one poison that you know is present, or you
neutralize one at random,
For the duration, the target has advantage on saving
throws against being poisoned, and it has resistance to
poison damage.
PURIFY

FOOD AND DRINK

1st-levei transmutation (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 10 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Ali nonmagical food and drink within a 5-foot-radius
sphere centered on a point of your choice within range is
purified and rendered free of poison and disease.
RAISE DEAD

5th-levei necromancy
Casting Time: I hour
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a diamond worth at least 500 gp,
which the spell consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou return a dead creature you touch to life, provided
that it has been dead no longer than 10 days. Ir the
creature's soul is both willing and at liberty to rejoin the
body, the creature returns to life with I hit poinl.
This spell also neutralizes any poisons and cures
nonmagical diseases that affected the creature at the
time it died. This spell doesn't, however, remove magical
diseases, curses, or similar effects; if these aren't first
removed prior to casting the spell, they take effect when
the creature returns to life. The spell can't return an
undead creature to life.
This spell closes ali mortal wounds, but it doesn't
restore missing body parts. Ir the creature is lacking
body parts or organs integral for its survival-its head,
for instance-the spell automatically fails.
Coming back from the dead is an ordeal. The target
takes a -4 penalty to ali attack rolls, saving throws, and
ability checks. Every time the target finishes a long rest,
the penalty is reduced by 1 until it disappears.
RARY'S TELEPATHIC

BOND

5th-levei divination (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (pieces of eggshell from two
different kinds of creatures)
Duration: I hour
Vou forge a telepathic link among up to eight willing
creatures of your choice within range, psychically

linking each creature to all the others for the duration.
Creatures with Intelligence scores of 2 ar less aren't
affected by this spell.
Until the spell ends, the targets can communicate
telepathically thraugh the bond whether ar not they have
a common language. The communication is possible
over any distance, though it can't extend to other planes
of existence.

Vou touch a creature and stimulate its natural healing
ability. The target regains 4d8 + 15 hit points. For the
duration of the spell, the target regains I hit point at the
start of each of its turns (10 hit points each minute).
The target's severed body members (fingers, legs,
tails, and so on), if any, are restored after 2 minutes.
If you have the severed part and hold it to the stump,
the spell instantaneously causes the limb to knit
to the stump.

RAY OF ENFEEBLEMENT

2nd./evel necromancy

REINCARNATE

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute

5th./evel transmutation

A black beam of enervating energy springs fram your
finger toward a creature within range. Make a ranged
spell attack against the target. On a hit, the target deals
only half damage with weapon attacks that use 5trength
until the spell ends.
At the end of each of the target's turns, it can make
a Constitution saving throw against the spell. On a
success, the spell ends.
RAY OF FROST

Evocation cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Instantaneous
A frigid beam of blue-white light streaks toward a
creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack
against the target. On a hit, it takes ld8 cold damage,
and its speed is reduced by 10 feet until the start of
your next turno
The spell's damage increases by Id8 when you reach
5th levei (2d8), 11th levei (3d8), and 17th levei (4d8).
RAY OF SICKNESS

1st-leveI necromancy
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, 5
Duration: Instantaneous
A ray of sickening greenish energy lashes out toward
a creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack
against the target. On a hit, the target takes 2d8 poison
damage and must make a Constitution saving throw.
On a failed save, it is also poisoned until the end of
your next turno
At Higher Leve/s. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei ar higher, the damage increases by
ld8 for each slot levei above 1st.
REGENERATE

7th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (a prayer wheel and holy water)
Duration: 1 hour

Casting Time: 1 hour
Range: Touch
Components: V, 5, M (rare oils and unguents worth at
least 1,000 gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou touch a dead humanoid ar a piece of a dead
humanoid. Provided that the creature has been dead no
longer than 10 days, the spell forms a new adult body
for it and then calls the soul to enter that body. If the
target's soul isn't free or willing to do so, the spell fails.
The magic fashions a new body for the creature
to inhabit, which likely causes the creature's race to
change. The DM rolls a dlOO and consults the following
table to determine what form the creature takes when
restored to life, ar the DM chooses a formo
dlOO

Raee

01-04

Dragonborn
Dwarf, hill

05-13
14-21
22-25
26-34
35-42
43-46
47-52
53-56

Dwarf, mountain
Elf, dark
Elf, high
Elf, wood
Gnome,
Gnome,
Half.elf

forest
rock

57-60
61-68

Haif.ore

69-76
77-96

Haifiing, stout
Human

97-00

Tiefiing

Halfiing,lightfoot

The reincarnated creature recalls its former life
and experiences. It retains the capabilities it had in its
original form, except it exchanges its original race for
the new one and changes its racial traits accordingly.
REMOVE CURSE

3rd./evel abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
At your touch, all curses affecting one creature ar
object end. If the object is a cursed magic item, its curse
remains, but the spell breaks its owner's attunement to
the object so it can be removed ar discarded.

P\RT

3

SPELLS

2~1

RESlSTANCE

REVIVIFY

Abjuration cantrip

3rd-level conjuration

Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a minialure doak)
Duration: Concenlralion, up lo I minule

Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (diamonds worlh 300 gp, which
lhe spell consumes)
Duration: Inslanlaneous

Vou louch one willing crealure. Once before lhe spell
ends, lhe largel can roll a d4 and add lhe number
ralled lo one saving lhraw of ils choice. It can rall
lhe die before or afler making lhe saving lhraw. The
spelllhen ends.
RESURRECTION

ROPE TRICK

7th-leveI necromancy

2nd-leveI transmutation

Casting Time: I hour
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a diamond worlh alleasl 1,000
gp, which lhe spell consumes)
Duration: Inslanlaneous

Casting Time: I aclion
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (powdered corn exlracl and a
lwisted loop of parchmenl)
Duration: I hour

Vou louch a dead crealure lhal has been dead for no
more than a cenlury, lhal didn'l die of old age, and lhal
isn'l undead. If ilS soul is free and willing, lhe largel
relurns lo life with ali ils hil poinls.
This spell neulralizes any poisons and cures normal
diseases affticling lhe creature when il died. It doesn'l,
however, remove magical diseases. curses, and lhe like;
if such effecls aren'l removed prior lo casling the spell,
lhey affticl lhe largel on ils relurn lo life.
This spell doses ali morlal wounds and reslores any
missing body paris.
Coming back from lhe dead is an ordeal. The largel
lakes a -4 penally lOali allack rolls, saving lhrows, and
abilily checks. Every lime lhe largel finishes a long resl,
the penally is reduced by I unlil il disappears.
Casling lhis spelllo reslore life lOa crealure lhat has
been dead for one year or longer laxes you greally. Unlil
you finish a long resl, you can'l casl spells again, and
you have disadvanlage on ali allack rolls, abilily checks,
and saving lhrows.

Vou touch a length of rape lhat is up lo 60 feellong.
One end of lhe rope then rises inlo lhe air unlillhe
whole rope hangs perpendicular lo lhe ground. AI lhe
upper end of the rope, an invisible enlrance opens lo an
exlradimensional space lhallasls unlillhe spell ends.
The extradimensional space can be reached by
dimbing lo lhe top of lhe rope. The space can hold as
many as eighl Medium or smaller creatures. The rope
can be pulled inlo lhe space, making lhe rape disappear
from view oulside lhe space,
Allacks and spells can'l crass lhrough lhe enlrance
into or oul of lhe exlradimensional space, bullhose
inside can see oul of il as if lhrough a 3-foOl-by-5-fool
window cenlered on lhe rope.
Anylhing inside lhe exlradimensional space drops oul
when lhe spell ends.

REVERSE GRAVITY

7th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: 100 feel
Components: V, S, M (a lodeslone and iran filings)
Duration: Concenlralion, up lO I minule
This spell reverses gravily in a 50-fool-radius, 100fool high cylinder cenlered on a poinl wilhin range. Ali
crealures and objecls thal aren'l somehow anchored lo
the ground in lhe area fali upward and reach lhe lop of
lhe area when you casllhis spell. A crealure can make a
Dexlerily saving thraw lo grab onlo a fixed objecl il can
reach, lhus avoiding lhe falI.
lf some solid objecl (such as a ceiling) is encounlered
in lhis fali, faIling objecls and crealures slrike il juSl as
lhey would during a normal downward falI. If an objecl
or crealure reaches lhe lop of lhe area wilhoul slriking
anylhing, il remains lhere, oscillaling slighlly, for
lhe duralion.
AI lhe end of lhe duralion, affecled objecls and
crealures fali back down.
272

Vou louch a crealure lhal has died wilhin lhe lasl
minule. Thal crealure relurns lo life wilh I hil poinl.
This spell can'l relurn lo life a crealure lhal has died of
old age, nor can il reslore any missing body parIs.

PART 3

I SPELLS

SACRED FLAME

Evocation cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feel
Components: V, S
Duration: Inslanlaneous
Flame.like radiance descends on a creature lhal you
can see wilhin range. The largel musl succeed on a
Dexterily saving throw or take Id8 radianl damage. The
largel gains no benefil from cover for lhis saving lhrow.
The spell's damage increases by Id8 when you reach
51h levei (2d8), Illh levei (3d8), and 171hleveI (4d8).
SANCTUARY

Ist./evel abjuration
Casting Time: I bonus aclion
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M (a small silver mirror)
Duration: I minule
Vou ward a crealure within range againsl allack. Unlil
lhe spell ends, any crealure who largels lhe warded
crealure wilh an allack or a harmful spell musl firsl
make a Wisdom saving lhrow. On a failed save, the
creature musl choose a new largel or lose lhe allack

or spell. This spell doesn't protect the warded creature
from area effects, such as the explosion of a fireball.
If the warded creature makes an attack or casts a spell
that affects an enemy creature, this spell ends.
SCORCHING

RAY

2nd./evel evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V. S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou create three rays of fire and hurJ them at targets
within range. Vou can hurJ them at one target or several.
Make a ranged spell attack for each ray. On a hit, the
target takes 2d6 fire damage.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd leveI or higher. you create one additional
ray for each slot leveI above 2nd.
SCRYING

5th-leveI divination
Casting Time: 10 minutes
Range: Self
Components: V. S. M (a focus worth at least 1.000 gp.
such as a crystal ball, a silver mirror, or a font filled
with holy water)
Duration: Concentration. up to la minutes
Vou can see and hear a particular creature you choose
that is on the same plane of existence as you. The target
must make a Wisdom saving throw, which is modified
by how well you know the target and the sort of physical
connection you have to it. Jf a target knows you're
casting this spell, it can fail the saving throw voluntarily
if it wants to be observed.
Knowledge
Secondhand

Save Modifier
(you have heard of the target)

Firsthand (you have met the target)
Familiar (you know the target well)
Connection
Likeness or picture

+s
+0

-s
Save Modifier

-2

Possession ar garment

-4

Body parto lock of hair. bit of nail, or the like

-10

On a successful save. the target isn't affected. and you
can't use this spell against it again for 24 hours.
On a failed save. the spell creates an invisible sensor
within 10 feet of the target. Vou can see and hear through
the sensor as if you were there. The sensor moves with
lhe target, remaining within 10 feet of it for the duration.
A creature that can see invisible objects sees the sensor
as a luminous orb about the size of your fist.
Instead of targeting a creature. you can choose a
location you have seen before as the target of this spell.
When you do, the sensor appcars al that location and
doesn't move.

SEARING

SMITE

1st-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
The next time you hit a creature with a melee weapon
attack during the spell's duration, your weapon flares
with white.hot intensity, and the attack deals an extra
Id6 tire damage to the target and causes the target to
ignite in flames. At the start of each of its turns until
the spell ends, the target must make a Constitution
saving throw. On a failed save, it takes Id6 tire damage.
On a successful save, the spell ends. lf the target or a
creature within 5 feet of it uses an action to put out the
flames, or if some other effect douses the flames (such
as the target being submerged in water), the spell ends.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, the initial extra damage
dealt by the attack increases by Id6 for each slot
leveI above 1st.
SEE INVISIBILITY

2nd./eveI divination
Casting Time: I action
Range: SeI f
Components: V,S, M (a pinch of tale and a small
sprinkling of powdered silver)
Duration: I hour
For the duration, you see invisible creatures and objects
as if they were visible, and you can see into the Ethereal
Plane. Ethereal creatures and objects appear ghostly
and translucent.
SEEMING

5th./evel iJJusion
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S
Duration: 8 hours
This spell allows you to change the appearance of any
number of creatures that you can see within range. Vou
give each target you choose a new, iIIusory appearance.
An unwilling target can make a Charisma saving throw,
and if it succeeds, it is unaffected by this spell.
The spell disguises physical appearance as well as
clothing, armor, weapons, and equipment. Vou can make
each creature se em I foot shorter or taller and appear
thin, fat, or in between. Vou can't change a target's body
type, so you must choose a form that has the same
basic arrangement of limbs. Otherwise, the extent of
the illusion is up to you. The spell lasts for the duration,
unless you use your action to dismiss it sooner.
The changes wrought by this spell fail to hold up to
physical inspection. For example, if you use this spell
to add a hat to a creature's outtit, objects pass through
the hat, and anyone who touches it would feel nothing
or would feel the creature's head and hair. If you use
this spell to appear thinner than you are, the hand of

PART 3 I SPELLS

someone who reaches out to touch you would bump into
you while it was seemingly still in midair.
A creature can use its action to inspect a target and
make an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your
spell save DC. If it succeeds, it becomes aware that the
target is disguised.
SENDING

3rd./eveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Unlimited
Components: V, S, M (a short piece of tine copper wire)
Duration: I round
Vou send a short message of twenty-tive words or
less to a creature with which you are familiar. The
creature hears the message in its mind, recognizes
you as the sender if it knows you, and can answer in a
like manner immediately. The spell enables creatures
with Intelligence scores of at least I to understand the
meaning of your message.
Vou can send the message across any distance and
even to other planes of existence, but if the target is on a
different plane than you, there is a 5 percent chance that
the message doesn't arrive.
SEQUESTER

7th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a powder composed of diamond,
emerald, ruby, and sapphire dust worth at least 5,000
gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled
By means of this spell, a willing creature or an object
can be hidden away, safe from detection for the
duration. When you cast the spell and touch the target,
it becomes invisible and can't be targeted by divination
spells or perceived through scrying sensors created by
divination spells.
If the target is a creature, it falls into a state of
suspended animation. Time ceases to flow for it, and it
doesn't grow older.
Vou can set a condition for the spell to end early.
The condition can be anything you choose, but it
must occur or be visible within I mile of the target.
Examples include "after 1,000 years" or "when the
tarrasque awakens." This spell also ends if the target
takes any damage.
SHAPECHANGE

9th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V,S, M (a jade circlet worth at least 1,500
gp, which you must place on your head before you
cast the spell)
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
Vou assume the form of a different creature for the
duration. The new form can be of any creature with
a challenge rating equal to your leveI or lower. The

creature can't be a construct or an undead, and you
must have seen the sort of creature at least once. Vou
transform into an average example of that creature, one
without any c1ass leveis or the Spellcasting trait.
Vour game statistics are replaced by the statistics
of the chosen creature, though you retain your
alignment and Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma
scores. Vou also retain ali of your skill and saving
throw proficiencies, in addition to gaining those of the
creature. If the creature has the same proficiency as you
and the bonus Iisted in its statistics is higher than yours,
use the creature's bonus in place of yours. Vou can't use
any legendary actions or lair actions of the new formo
Vou assume the hit points and Hit Dice ofthe new
formo When you revert to your normal form, you
return to the number of hit points you had before you
transformed. ]f you revert as a result of dropping to
O hit points, any excess damage carries over to your
normal formo As long as the excess damage doesn't
reduce your normal form to O hit points, you aren't
knocked unconscious.
Vou retain the benefit of any features from your c1ass,
race, or other source and can use them, provided that
your new form is physically capable of doing so. Vou
can't use any special senses you have (for example,
darkvision) unless your new form also has that sense.
Vou can only speak if the creature can normally speak.
When you transform, you choose whether your
equipment falls to the ground, merges into the new
form, or is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as
normal. The DM determines whether it is practical for
the new form to wear a piece of equipment, based on
the creature's shape and size. Vour equipment doesn't
change shape or size to match the new form, and any
equipment that the new form can't wear must either fali
to the ground or merge into your new formo Equipment
that merges has no effect in that state.
During this spell's duration, you can use your action to
assume a different form following the same restrictions
and rules for the original form, with one exception; if
your new form has more hit points than your current
one, your hit points remain at their current value.

SHIELD

1st-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1 reaction, which you take when you are
hit by an attack or targeted by the magic missile spell
Range: SeI f
Components: V, S
Duration: 1 round
An invisible barrier of magical force appears and
protects YOU. Until the start ofyour next turn, you have a
+5 bonus to AC, including against the triggering attack,
and you take no damage from magic missile.
SHIELD

OF FAITH

1st-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S, M (a small parchment with a bit of
holy text writlen on it)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
A shimmering field appears and surrounds a creature
ofyour choice within range, granting it a +2 bonus to AC
for the duration.
SHILLELAGH

Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (mistletoe, a shamrock leaf, and a
c1ub or quarterstaff)
Duration: 1 minute
The wood of a c1ub or quarterstaff you are holding is
imbued with nature's power. For the duration, you can
use your spellcasting ability instead of Strength for
the atlack and damage rolls of melee attacks using
that weapon, and the weapon's damage die becomes
a d8. The weapon also becomes magical, if it isn't
already. The spell ends if you cast it again or if you let go
of the weapon.
SHOCKING

GRASP

Evocat/on cantrip
SHATTER

2nd.level evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S, M (a chip of mica)
Duration: Instantaneous
A sudden loud ringing noise, painfully intense, erupts
from a point of your choice within range. Each creature
in a lO-foot-radius sphere centered on that point must
make a Constitution saving throw. A creature takes
3d8 thunder damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one. A creature made of
inorganic material such as stone, crystal, or metal has
disadvantage on this saving throw.
A nonmagical object that isn't being worn or carried
also takes the damage if it's in the spcll's arca.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd levei or higher, the damage increases by
ld8 for each slot levei above 2nd.

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Lightning springs from your hand to deliver a shock to
a creature you try to touch. Make a melee spell atlack
against the target. Vou have advantage on the attack roll
if the target is wearing armor made of metal. On a hit,
the target takes ld8lightning damage, and it can't take
reactions until the start of its next turno
The spell's damage incrcases hy ld8 when you reach
5th levei (2d8), 11th levei (3d8), and 17th levei (4d8).
SILENCE

2nd-leveI iIlusion (ritl1al)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
PART 3

SPEI LS

For the duration, no sound can be created within or
pass through a 20-foot-radius sphere centered on a
point you choose within range. Any creature or object
entirely inside the sphere is immune to thunder damage,
and creatures are deafened while entirely inside it.
Casting a spell that includes a verbal component is
impossible there.
SILENT

IMAGE

1st-/evel iJlusion
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S, M (a bit of fleece)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou create the image of an object, a creature, or some
other visible phenomenon that is no larger than a 15-foot
cube. The image appears at a spot within range and
lasts for the duration. The image is purely visual; it isn't
accompanied by sound, smell, or other sensory effects.
Vou can use your action to cause the image to move to
any spot within range. As the image changes location,
you can alter its appearance so that its movements
appear natural for the image. For example, if you create
an image of a creature and move it, you can alter the
image so that it appears to be walking.
Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be an
illusion, because things can pass through it. A creature
that uses its action to examine the image can determine
that it is an illusion with a successful Intelligence
(Investigation) check against your spell save DC. If a
creature disceros the illusion for what it is, the creature
can see through the image.
SIMULACRUM

7th-levei illusion
Casting Time: 12 hours
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (snow or ice in quantities
sufficient to made a life-size copy of the duplicated
creature; some hair, fingeroail clippings, or other
piece of that creature's body placed inside the snow
or ice; and powdered ruby worth 1,500 gp, sprinkled
over the duplicate and consumed by the spell)
Duration: Until dispelled
Vou shape an illusory duplica te of one beast or
humanoid that is within range for the entire casting
time of the spell. The duplicate is a creature, partially
real and formed from ice or snow, and it can take
actions and otherwise be affected as a normal creature.
It appears to be the same as the original, but it has half
the creature's hit point maximum and is formed without
any equipment. Otherwise, the illusion uses ali the
statistics of the creature it duplicates.
The simulacrum is friendly to you and creatures you
designa te. It obeys your spoken commands, moving
and acting in accordance with your wishes and acting
on your turo in combat. The simulacrum lacks the
ability to learo or beco me more powerful, so it never
increases its levei or other abilities, nor can it regain
expended spell slots.

PART 3

If the simulacrum is damaged, you can repair it in an
alchemicallaboratory, using rare herbs and minerais
worth 100 gp per hit poim it regains. The simulacrum
lasts until it drops to O hit points, at which point it
reverts to snow and melts instantly.
If you cast this spell again, any currently
active duplicates you created with this spell are
instantly destrayed.

I SPELLS

SLEEP

1st-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of fine sand, rose petals,
or a cricket)
Duration: 1 minute
This spell sends creatures into a magical slumber.
RolI 5d8; the total is how many hit points of creatures
this spell can affect. Creatures within 20 feet of
a point you choose within range are affected in
ascending order of their currem hit points (ignoring
unconscious creatures).
Starting with the creature that has the lowest current
hit points, each creature affected by this spell falls
unconscious until the spell ends, the sleeper takes
damage, or someone uses an action to shake or slap the
sleeper awake. Subtract each creature's hit points fram
the total before moving on to the creature with the next
lowest hit points. A creature's hit points must be equal
to or less than the remaining total for that creature
to be affected.
Undead and creatures immune to being charmed
aren't affected by this spell.
At Hil1her LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd levei or higher, roll an additional 2d8 for
each slot levei above 1st.
SLEET STORM

3rd-/evel conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 150 feet
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of dust and a few
drops of water)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Until the spell ends, freezing rain and sleet fali in a
20-foot-tall cylinder with a 40-foot radius centered on
a point you choose within range. The area is heavily
obscured, and exposed flames in the area are doused.
The ground in the area is covered with slick ice,
making it difficult terrain. When a creature enters the
spell's area for the first time on aturo or starts its turo
there, it must make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed
save, it falls prone.
If a creature is concentrating in the spell's area, the
creature must make a successful Constitution saving
throw against your spell save DC or lose concentration.

SLOW

3rd-Ievel transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a drop of molasses)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
Vou alter time around up to six creatures ofyour
choice in a 40-foot cube within range, Each target must
succeed on a Wisdom saving throw ar be affected by
this spell for the duration.
An affected target's speed is halved, it takes a -2
penalty to AC and Dexterity saving throws, and it can't
use reactions. On its turn, it can use elther an action ar
a bonus action, not both. Regardless of the creature's
abilities ar magic items, it can't make more than one
melee ar ranged attack during its turno
If the creature attempts to cast a spell with a casting
time of 1 action, roll a d20. On an 11 ar higher, the spell
doesn't take effect until the creature's next turn, and the
creature must use its action on that turn to complete the
spell. If it can't, the spell is wasted.
A creature affected by this spell makes another
Wisdom savlng throw at the end of its turno On a
successful save, the effect ends for lI.
SPARE THE DYING

Necromancy cantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou touch a living creature that has O hit points. The
creature becomes stable. This spell has no effect on
undead ar constructs.
SPEAK WITH ANIMALS

1st-leveI divination (ritual)
Casting Time: I action
Range: Sei f
Components: V, S
Duration: 10 minutes
Vou gain the ability to comprehend and verbally
communicate with beasts for the duration. The
knowledge and awareness of many beasts is limited
by their intelligence, but at minimum, beasts can
give you information about nearby locations and
monsters, inc1uding whatever they can perceive ar have
perceived within the past day. Vou mlght be able to
persuade a beast to perform a small favor for you, at the
DM's discretion.
SPEAK WITH DEAD

mouth and can't be undead. The spell fails if the corpse
was the target of this spell within the last 10 days.
Until the spell ends, you can ask the corpse up to five
questions. The corpse knows only what it knew in life,
inc1uding the languages it knew. Answers are usually
brief, cryptic, ar repetitive, and the corpse is under no
compulsion to offer a truthful answer if you are hostile
to it or it recognizes you as an enemy. This spell doesn't
return the creature's soul to its body, only its animating
spiril. Thus, the corpse can't learn new Information,
doesn't comprehend anything that has happened since it
died, and can't speculate about future events.
SPEAK WITH PLANTS

3rd-Ievel transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Sei f (30-foot radius)
Components: V, S
Duration: 10 minutes
Vou imbue plants within 30 feet of you with limited
sentience and animation, giving them the ability
to communicate with you and follow your simple
commands. Vou can question plants about events in the
spell's area within the past day, gaining information
about crealures that have passed, weather, and other
circumstances.
Vou can also turn difficult terrain caused by plant
growth (such as thickets and undergrowth) into ordinary
terrain that lasls for the duratlon. Or you can turn
ordinary terrain where plants are present into difficult
terrain that lasts for the duration, causing vines and
branches to hindcr pursuers, for example.
Plants might be able to perform other tasks on your
behalf, at the DM's discretion. The spell doesn't enable
plants to uproot themselves and move about, but they
can freely move branches, tendrils, and stalks.
lf a plant creature is in the area, you can communicate
with it as if you shared a common language, but you
gain no magical ability to influence it.
This spell can cause the plants created by the entangle
spell to release a restrained creature.
SPIDER CUMB

2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a drop of bitumen and a spider)
Duration: Concentration, up to I hour
Until the spell ends, one willing creature you touch
gains the ability to move up, down, and across vertical
surfaces and upside down along ceilings, while leaving
its hands free. The target also gains a c1imbing speed
equal to its walking speed.

3rd-Ievel necromancy
Casting Time: I action
Range: 10 feet
Components: V, S, M (burning incense)
Duration: 10 minutes
Vou grant the semblance of life and intelligence to a
corpse of your choice within range, allowing It to answer
the questions you pose. The corpse must still have a

SPIKE GROWTH

2nd-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: ISO feet
Components: V, S, M (seven sharp thorns ar seven
small twigs, each sharpened to a point)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
PART 3 I SPELLS

277

The ground in a 20-foot radius centered on a point
within range twists and sprouts hard spikes and thorns.
The area becomes difficult terrain for the duration.
When a creature moves into or within the area, it takes
2d4 piercing damage for every 5 feet it travels.
The transformation of the ground is camoufiaged to
look natura!. Any creature that can't see the area at the
time the spell is cast must make a Wisdom (Perception)
check against your spell save DC to recognize the
terrain as hazardous before entering it.
SPIRIT

GUARDIANS

3rd-/evel conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: SeI f (15-foot radius)
Components: V, S, M (a holy symbol)
Duration: Concentration, up to lO minutes
Vou call forth spirits to protect you. They fiit around you
to a distance of 15 feet for the duration. If you are good
or neutra!. their spectral form appears angelic or fey
(your choice). If you are evil, they appear fiendish.
When you cast this spell, you can designate any
number of creatures you can see to be unaffected by it.
An affected creature's speed is halved in the area, and
when the creature enters the area for the first time on
a turn or starts its turn there, it must make a Wisdom
saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 3d8
radiant damage (if you are good or neutral) or 3d8
necrotic damage (if you are evil). On a successful save,
the creature takes half as much damage.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 4th leveI or higher, the damage increases by
Id8 for each slot leveI above 3rd.
SPIRITUAL

WEAPON

STAGGERING

SMITE

4th-levei evacatian
Casting Time: 1 banus actian
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Canccntration, up to I minute
The next time you hit a creature with a melee weapon
attack during this spell's duration, your weapon pierces
both body and mind, and the attack deals an extra
4d6 psychic damage to the target. The target must
make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, it has
disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks, and
can't take reactions, until the end of its next turno
STINKING

CLOUD

3rd-/evel conjuratiaIl
Casting Time: I action
Range: 90 feet
Components: V, S, M (a rotten egg or several skunk
cabbage leaves)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vou create a 20-foot-radius sphere of yellow, nauseating
gas centered on a point within range. The c10ud spreads
around corners, and its area is hcavily obscured. The
cloud lingers in the air for the duratioll.
Each creature that is completely within the c1aud at
the start af its turn must make a Canstitutian saving
throw against paisano On a failed save, the creature
spends its actian that turn retching and reeling.
Creatures that dan't need to breathe ar are immune to
paison automatically succeed on this saving throw.
A maderate wind (at least 10 miles per hour) disperses
the c10ud after 4 rounds. A strong wind (at Jeast 20
miles per haur) disperses it after I round.

2nd-levei evacatian
Casting Time: I bonus actian
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: I minute
You create a fioating, spectral weapon within range that
lasts for the duration or until you cast this spell again.
When you cast the spell, you can make a melee spell
attack against a creature within 5 feet of the weapon. On
a hit, the target takes force damage equal to Id8 + your
spellcasting ability modifier.
As a bonus action on your turn, you can move the
weapon up to 20 feet and repeat the attack against a
creature within 5 feet of it.
The weapon can take whatever form yau choose.
Clerics of deities who are associated with a particular
weapon (as SI. Cuthbert is known for his mace
and Thor for his hammer) make this spell's effect
resemble that weapon.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 3rd leveI or higher, the damage increases by
Id8 for every twa slot leveIs above the 2nd.

PART 3

I SI'ELLS

STONE

SHAPE

4th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (50ft c1ay,which must be worked
into roughly the desired shape of the stone object)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou touch a stone object of Medium size or smaller or
a section of stone no more than 5 feet in any dimension
and form it into any shape that suits your purpose. So,
for example, you could shape a large rock into a weapon,
idol, or coffer, or make a small passage through a wall,
as long as the wall is less than 5 feet thick. Vou could
also shape a stone door or its frame to seal the door
shut. The object you create can have up to two hinges
and a latch, but finer mechallical detail isn't possible.
STONESKIN

4th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (diamond dust worth 100 gp,
which the spell consumes)
Duration: COllcentration, up to I hour

This spell turns the flesh of a willing creature you touch
as hard as stone. Until the spell ends, the target has
resistance to nonmagical bludgeoning, piercing, and
slashing damage.
STORM OF VENGEANCE

9th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Sight
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
A churning storm cloud forms, centered on a point you
can see and spreading to a radius of 360 fee!. Lightning
flashes in the area, thunder booms, and strong winds
roar. Each creature under the cloud (no more than 5,000
feet beneath the cloud) when it appears must make a
Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature
takes 2d6 thunder damage and becomes deafened
for 5 minutes.
Each round you maintain concentration on this spell,
the storm produces additional effects on your turno
Round 2. Acidic rain falls from the cloud.
Each creature and object under the cloud takes
ld6 acid damage.
Round 3. Vou call six bolts of lightning from the
cloud to strike six creatures or objects of your choice
beneath the cloud. A given creature or object can't be
struck by more than one boi!. A struck creature must
make a Dexterity saving throw. The creature takes
lOd6lightning damage on a failed save, or half as much
damage on a successful one.
Round 4. Hailstones rain down from the
cloud. Each creature under the cloud takes 2d6
bludgeoning damage.
Round 5-10. Gusts and freezing rain assail the
area under the cloud. The area becomes difficult
terrain and is heavily obscured. Each creature there
takes ld6 cold damage. Ranged weapon attacks in
the area are impossible. The wind and rain count as
a severe distraction for the purposes of maintaining
concentration on spells. Finally, gusts of strong wind
(ranging from 20 to 50 miles per hour) automatically
disperse fog, mists, and similar phenomena in the area,
whether mundane or magical.
SUGGESTlON

2nd-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, M (a snake's tongue and either a bit of
honeycomb or a drop of sweet oil)
Duration: Concentration, up to 8 hours
Vou suggest a course of activity (limited to a sentence
or two) and magically influence a creature you can
see within range that can hear and understand YOU.
Creatures that can't be charmed are immune to this
effec!. The suggestion must be worded in such a manner
as to make the course of action sound reasonable.
Asking the creature to stab itself, throw itself onto
a spear, immolate itself, or do some other obviously
harmful act ends the spell.

The target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a
failed save, it pursues the course of action you described
to the best of its ability. The suggested course of action
can continue for the entire duration. Ir the suggested
activity can be completed in a shorter time, the spell
ends when the subject tinishes what it was asked to do.
Vou can also specify conditions lhat will trigger a
special activity during the duration. For example, you
might suggest that a knight give her warhorse to the
tirst beggar she meets. Ir the condition isn't met before
the spell expires, the activity isn't performed.
Ir you or any of your companions damage the target,
the spell ends.
SUNBEAM

6th-levei evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self (60-foot line)
Components: V, S, M (a magnifying glass)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
A beam of brilliant light flashes out from your hand
in a 5-foot-wide, 60-foot-long line. Each creature in
the line must make a Constitution saving throw. On a
failed save, a creature takes 6d8 radiant damage and
is blinded until your next turno On a successful save,
it takes half as much damage and isn't blinded by this
spell. Undead and oozes have disadvantage on this
saving throw.
Vou can create a new line of radiance as your action
on any turn until the spell ends.
For the duration, a mote of brilliant radiance shines in
your hand. It sheds bright light in a 30-foot radius and
dim light for an additional 30 fee!. This lighl is sunligh!.
SUNBURST

8th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 150 feet
Components: V, S, M (tire and a piece of sunstone)
Duration: Instantaneous
Brilliant sunlight flashes in a 60-foot radius centered
on a point you choose within range. Each creature in
that light must make a Constitution saving throw. On a
failed save, a creature takes 12d6 radiant damage and is
blinded for 1 minute. On a successful save, it takes half
as much damage and isn't blinded by this spell. Undead
and oozes have disadvantage on this saving throw.
A creature blinded by this spell makes another
Constitution saving throw at the end of each of its turns.
On a successful save, it is no longer blinded.
This spell dispels any darkness in its area that was
created by a spell.
SWIFT QurVER

5th-leveI transmutation
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a quiver containing at least one
piece of ammunition)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute

PART 3 I SPELLS

279

Vou transmute your quiver so it produces an endless
supply of nonmagical ammunition, which seems to leap
into your hand when you reach for it.
On each of your turns until the spell ends, you can use
a bonus action to make two attacks with a weapon that
uses ammunition from the quiver. Each time you make
such a ranged attack, your quiver magically replaces
the piece of ammunition you used with a similar piece
of nonmagical ammunition. Any pieces of ammunition
created by this spell disintegrate when the spell ends. ]f
the quiver leaves your possession, the spell ends.
SYMBOL
7th-levei abjuration
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (mercury, phosphorus, and
powdered diamond and opa I with a total value of at
least 1,000 gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: Until dispelled or triggered
When you cast this spell, you inscribe a harmful glyph
either on a surface (such as a section of floor, a wall, or
a table) or within an object that can be c10sed to conceal
the glyph (such as a book, a scroll, or a treasure chest).
]f you choose a surface, the glyph can cover an area of
the surface no larger than 10 feet in diameter. If you
choose an object, that object must remain in its place; if
the object is moved more than 10 feet from where you
cast this spell, the glyph is broken, and the spell ends
without being triggered.
The glyph is nearly invisible, requiring an Intelligence
(lnvestigation) check against your spell save
DC to find it.
Vou decide what triggers the glyph when you cast the
spell. For glyphs inscribed on a surface, the most typical
triggers include touching or stepping on the glyph,
removing another object covering it, approaching within
a certain distance of it, or manipulating the object
that holds it. For glyphs inscribed within an object,
the most common triggers are opening the object,
approaching within a certain distance of it, or seeing or
reading the glyph.
Vou can further refine the trigger so the spell is
activated only under certain circumstances or according
to a creature's physical characteristics (such as height
or weight), or physical kind (for example, the ward could
be set to affect hags or shapechangers). Vou can also
specify creatures that don't trigger the glyph, such as
those who say a certain password.
When you inscribe the glyph, choose one of the
options below for its effect. Once triggered, the glyph
glows, filling a 60-foot-radius sphere with dim Iight
for 10 minutes, after which time the spell ends. Each
creature in the sphere when the glyph activates is
targcted by its effect, as is a creature that enters the
sphere for the first time on a turn or ends its turn there.
Death. Each target must make a Constitution saving
throw, taking IOdlO necrotic damage on a failed save, or
half as much damage on a successful save.
Discord. Each target must make a Constitution saving
throw. On a failed save, a target bickers and argues
with other creatures for 1 minute. During this time,

280

PART 3

I SPELLS

it is incapable of meaningful communication and has
disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks.
Fear. Each target must make a Wisdom saving throw
and becomes frightened for 1 minute on a failed save.
While frightened, the target drops whatever it is holding
and must move at least 30 feet away from the glyph on
each of its turns, if able.
Hope/essness. Each target must make a Charisma
saving throw. On a failed save, the target is
overwhelmed with despair for 1 minute. During this
time, it can't attack or target any creature with harmful
abilities, spells, or other magical effects.
Insanity. Each target must make an lntelligence saving
throw. On a failed save, the target is driven insane for
1 minute. An insane creature can't take actions, can't
understand what other creatures say, can't read, and
speaks only in gibberish. The DM contrais its movement,
which is erratic.
Pain. Each target must make a Constitution saving
throw and becomes incapacitated with excruciating pain
for 1 minute on a failed save.
S/eep. Each target must make a Wisdom saving throw
and falls unconscious for 10 minutes on a failed save. A
creature awakens if it takes damage or if someone uses
an action to shake or slap it awake.
Stunning. Each target must make a Wisdom saving
throw and becomes stunned for 1 minute on a failed save.
TASHA'S HIDEOUS

LAUGHTER

1st-levei enchantment
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (tiny tarts and a feather that is
waved in the air)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
A creature of your choice that you can see within range
perceives everything as hilariously funny and falls
into fits of laughter if this spell affects it. The target
must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or fali prone,
becoming incapacitated and unable to stand up for the
duration. A creature with an lntelligence score of 4 or
less isn't affected.
At the end of each of its turns, and each time it takes
damage, the target can make another Wisdom saving
throw. The target has advantage on the saving throw if
it's triggered by damage. On a success, the spell ends.
TELEKINESIS

5th.level trallsmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou gain the ability to move or manipulate creatures
or objects by thought. When you cast the spell, and as
your action each round for the duration, you can exert
your will on one creature or object that you can see
within range, causing the appropriate effect below. Vou
can affect the same target round after round, or choose
a new one at any time. ]f you switch targets, the prior
target is no longer affected by the spell.

Creature. Vou can lry to move a Huge or smaller
crealure. Make an abilily check wilh your spellcasting
ability contested by the crealure's Strength check. ]f
you win lhe contesl, you move the creature up to 30 feet
in any direclion, including upward but not beyond the
range of lhis spel!. Until the end of your nexllurn, the
creature is restrained in your telekinetic gripo A creature
Iifled upward is suspended in mid.air.
On subsequenl rounds, you can use your action lO
atlempl to maintain your telekinetic grip on the creature
by repealing lhe contest.
Object. Vou can try to move an objecl thal weighs
up to 1,000 pounds.lfthe object isn't being worn or
carried, you automalically move il up lo 30 feet in any
direction, but not beyond lhe range of lhis spell.
If the object is worn or carried by a creature, you must
make an ability check wilh your spellcasting ability
contesled by lhat creature's Strenglh check. ]f you
succeed, you pull the object away from that creature and
can move il up to 30 feel in any direclion but nol beyond
the range of this spel!.
Vou can exert fine conlrol on objecls with your
telekinetic grip, such as manipulaling a simple tool,
opening a door or a conlainer, stowing or relrieving
an item from an open container, or pouring the
contents from a via!'
TELEPATHY

8th./evel evocation
Casting Time: I aclion
Range: Unlimited
Components: V, S, M (a pair of Iinked silver rings)
Duration: 24 hours
Vou create a telepathic link between yourself and
a willing crealure with which you are familiar. The
creature can be anywhere on the same plane of
exislence as you. The spell ends if you or the largel are
no longer on the same plane.
Until the spell ends, you and the target can
inslantaneously share words, images, sounds, and
other sensory messages with one another through the
Iink, and lhe target recognizes you as the creature it
is communicating with. The spell enables a creature
wilh an Intelligence score of at least I to understand
lhe meaning of your words and lake in lhe scope of any
sensory messages you send lo 11.
TELEPORT

7th./evel conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 10 feel
Components: V
Duration: Inslantaneous
This spell instantly transports you and up to eight
willing creatures of your choice that you can see within
range, or a single object that you can see within range,
to a destination you select. Ifyou target an object, il
must be able to fit enlirely inside a lO.fool cube, and il
can't be held or carried by an unwilling crealure.
The destination you choose must be known to you,
and il musl be on the same plane of exislence as

you. Vour familiarily with the destinalion determines
whelher you arrive lhere successfully. The DM rolls
dlOO and consults the table.

Mishap

Familiarily

Similar
Area

Off
Targel

01-100

Permanent circle

Associaled

01-100

objecl

Very familiar
Seen casually
Viewed once
Descriplion
False destinalion

On

Targel

01-05
01-33

06-13
34-43

14-24
44-53

25-100
54-100

01-43

44-53
44-53

54-73
54-73

74-100
74-100

01-43
01-50

51-100

Familiarity. "Permanent circle" means a permanent
teleportation circle whose sigil sequence you know.
"Associaled object" means that you possess an objecl
taken from the desired destination within the last six
months, such as a book from a wizard's Iibrary, bed
linen from a royal suite, or a chunk of marble from a
lich's secret tombo
"Very familiar" is a place you have been very often, a
place you have carefully studied, or a place you can see
when you cast the spell. "Seen casually" is someplace
you have seen more than once bul wilh which you aren't
very familiar. "Viewed once" is a place you have seen
once, possibly using magic. "Description" is a place
whose Iocation and appearance you know through
someone else's description, perhaps from a map.
"False destination" is a place that doesn't exist.
Perhaps you tried to scry an enemy's sanctum but
instead viewed an illusion, or you are atlempting lo
teleport to a familiar localion that no longer exists.
00 Target. Vou and your group (or the target objecl)
appear where you wanllo.
OffTarget. Vou and your group (or the larget object)
appear a random dislance away from the deslination
in a random direclion. Distance off target is Id 10 x
Id lO percent of the distance that was to be traveled.
For example, if you tried to traveI 120 miles, landed off
largel, and rolled a 5 and 3 on the two dlOs, lhen you
would be off largel by 15 percent, or 18 miles. The DM
determines lhe direction off targel randomly by rolling a
d8 and designaling I as north, 2 as northeast, 3 as easl,
and so on around lhe points of lhe compasso ]f you were
teleporting lo a coastal city and wound up 18 miles out
at sea, you could be in trouble.
Similar Area. Vou and your group (or the targel
object) wind up in a different area that's visually or
themalically similar to the target area. ]f you are
heading for your home laboratory, for example, you
might wind up in another wizard's laboratory or in
an alchemical supply shop that has many of the same
tools and implemenls as your laboratory. Generally,
you appear in the closest similar place, bul since the
spell has no range Iimit, you could conceivably wind up
anywhere on the plane.
Mishap. The spell's unpredictable magic results in a
difficultjourney. Each leleporting crealure (or the largel
objecl) lakes 3d 10 force damage, and lhe DM rerolls on

PART 3

PELLS

281

the table to see where you wind up (multiple mishaps
can occur, dealing damage each time).

THAUMATURGY

TELEPORTATION

Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V
Duration: Up to 1 minute

CIRCLE

5th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1 minute
Range: 10 feet
Components: V, M (rare chalks and inks infused with
precious gems with 50 gp, which the spell consumes)
Duration: 1 round
As you cast the spell, you draw a lO-foot-diameter
circle on the ground inscribed with sigils that Iink
your location to a permanent teleportation circle of
your choice whose sigil sequence you know and that is
on the same plane of existence as you. A shimmering
portal opens within the circle you drew and remains
open until the end of your next turn. Any creature that
enters the portal instantly appears within 5 feet of the
destination circle or in the nearest unoccupied space if
that space is occupied.
Many major tempIes, guilds, and other important
places have permanent teleportation circles inscribed
somewhere within their confines. Each such circle
includes a unique sigil sequence-a string of magical
runes arranged in a particular pattern. When you first
gain the ability to cast this spell, you learn the sigil
sequences for two destinations on the Material Plane,
determined by the DM. Vou can learn additional sigil
sequences during your adventures. Vou can commit
a new sigil sequence to memory after studying it
for 1 minute.
Vou can create a permanent teleportation circle by
casting this spell in the same location every day for one
year. Vou need not use the circle to teleport when you
cast the spell in this way.
TENSER'S FLOATING

DISK

1st-leveI conjuration (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M (a drop of mercury)
Duration: 1 hour
This spell creates a circular, horizontal plane of force,
3 feet in dia meter and 1 inch thick, that lIoats 3 feet
above the ground in an unoccupied space of your choice
that you can see within range. The disk remains for the
duration, and can hold up to 500 pounds. If more weight
is placed on it, the spell ends, and everything on the disk
falls to the ground.
The disk is immobile while you are within 20 feet of
it. If you move more than 20 feet away from it, the disk
follows you so that it remains within 20 feet of YOU. It
can move across uneven terrain, up or down stairs,
slopes and the Iike. but it can't cross an e1evation change
of 10 feet or more. For example, the disk can't move
across a IO-foot-deep pit, nor could it leave such a pit if it
was created at the bottom.
If you move more than 100 feet from the disk (typically
because it can't move around an obstacle to follow you),
the spell ends.

PART 3 I SrELLS

Transmutation cantrip

Vou manifest a minor wonder, a sign of supernatural
power, within range. Vou create one of the following
magical effects within range:
Vour voice booms up to three times as loud as normal
for 1 minute.
Vou cause liames to lIicker, brighten, dim, or change
color for 1 minute.
Vou cause harmless tremors in the ground for 1
minute.
Vou create an instantaneous sound that originates
from a point of your choice within range, such as a
rumble of thunder, the cry of a raven, or ominous
whispers.
Vou instantaneously cause an unlocked door or window to lIyopen or slam shut.
Vou alter the appearance of your eyes for 1 minute.
If you cast this spell multi pIe times, you can have up to
three of its l-minute effects active at a time, and you can
dismiss such an effect as an action.
THORNWHIP

Transmutation cantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V,S, M (the stem of a plant with thorns)
Duration: 1nstantaneous
Vou create a long, vine-Iike whip covered in thorns that
lashes out at your command toward a creature in range.
Make a melee spell attack against the target. ]f the
attack hits, the creature takes 1d6 piercing damage, and
if the creature is Large or smaller, you pull the creature
up to 10 feet c10ser to you.
This spell's damage increases by 1d6 when you reach
5th leveI (2d6), 11th levei (3d6), and 17th leveI (4d6).
THUNDEROUS

SMITE

1st-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1 bonus action
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute
The first time you hit with a melee weapon attack
during this spell's duration, your weapon rings with
thunder that is audible within 300 feet of you, and the
attack deals an extra 2d6 thunder damage to the target.
Additionally, if the target is a creature, it must succeed
on a Strength saving throw or be pushed 10 feet away
from you and knocked prone.
THUNDERWAVE

1st-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Self (15-foot cube)

Components: V, S
Duration: Instantaneous

TREE STRIDE

A wave of thunderous foree sweeps out from you. Eaeh
ereature in a 15-foot eube originating from you must
make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a
ereature takes 2d8 thunder damage and is pushed 10
feet away from you. On a sueeessful save, the ereature
takes half as mueh damage and isn't pushed.
In addition, unseeured objeets that are eompletely
within the area of effeet are automatically pushed 10 feet
away from you by the spell's effeet, and the spell emits a
thunderous boom audible out to 300 feet.
At Higher LeveIs. When you east this spell using a
spell slot of 2nd leveI or higher, the damage inereases by
ld8 for eaeh slot leveI above 1st.

Casting Time: 1 action
Range:Self
Components: V, S
Duration: Coneentration, up to 1 minute

TIME

STOP

9th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1 aetion
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou briefly stop the flow of time for everyone but
yourself. No time passes for other ereatures, while you
take Id4 + 1 turns in a row, during which you ean use
aetions and move as normal.
This spell ends if one of the aetions you use during
this period, or any effeets that you ereate during this
period, affeets a ereature other than you or an objeet
being worn or earried by someone other than you. In
addition, the spell ends if you move to a plaee more than
1,000 feet from the loeation where you east it.
TONGUES

3rd-/evel divination
Casting Time: I aetion
Range: Toueh
Components: V, M (a small day model of a ziggurat)
Duration: 1 hour
This spell grants the ereature you toueh the ability to
understand any spoken language it hears. Moreover,
when the target speaks, any ereature that knows at
least one language and ean hear the target understands
what it says.
TRANSPORT

VIA PLANTS

6th-levei eonjuration
Casting Time: 1 aetion
Range: 10 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: 1 round
This spell ereates a magieallink between a Large or
larger inanimate plant within range and another plant,
at any distanee, on the same plane of existence. Vou
must have seen or touched the destination plant at least
onee before. For the duration, any creature can step into
the target plant and exit from the destination plant by
using 5 feet of movement.

5th-leveI conjuration

Vou gain the ability to enter a tree and move from inside
it to inside another tree of the same kind within 500
feet. Both trees must be living and at least the same size
as you. Vou must use 5 feet of movement to enter a tree.
Vou instantly know the location of ali other trees of the
same kind within 500 feet and, as part of the move used
to enter the tree, ean either pass into one of those trees
or step out of the tree you're in. Vou appear in a spot of
your choice within 5 feet of the destination tree, using
another 5 feet of movement. If you have no movement
left, you appear within 5 feet of the tree you entered.
Vou can use this transportation ability once per round
for the duration. Vou must end each turn outside a tree.
TRUE POLYMORPH

9th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (a drop of mereury, a dolIop of
gum arabic, and a wisp of smoke)
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour
Choose one ereature or nonmagical objeet that you
can see within range. Vou transform the creature into
a different creature, the ereature into an object, or the
objeet into a creature (the object must be neither worn
nor earried by another creature). The transformation
lasts for the duration, or until the target drops to O hit
points or dies. If you concentrate on this spelI for the fulI
duration, the transformation beeomes permanent.
Shapechangers aren't affected by this spell. An
unwilIing creature ean make a Wisdom saving throw,
and if it sueeeeds, it isn't affected by this spell.
Creature into Creature. If you turn a creature into
another kind of creature, the new form can be any kind
you choose whose ehalIenge rating is equal to or less
than the target's (or its leveI. if the target doesn't have a
chalIenge rating). The target's game statistics, induding
mental ability scores, are replaced by the statisties of
the new formo It retains its alignment and personality.
The target assumes the hit points of its new form,
and when it reverts to its normal form, the creature
returns to the number of hit points it had before it
transformed. If it reverts as a result of dropping to
O hit points, any excess damage carries over to its
normal formo As long as the excess damage doesn't
reduce the creature's normal form to O hit points, it isn't
knocked unconscious.
The creature is limited in the actions it can perform by
the nature of its new form, and it can't speak, east spelIs,
or take any other action that requires hands or speech,
unless its new form is capable of such actions.
The target's gear melds into the new formo The
creature can't activate, use, wield, or otherwise benelit
from any of its equipment.

PART 3

SPELLS

Object into Creature. Vou can turn an object into
any kind of creature, as long as the creature's size
is no larger than the object's size and the creature's
cha11enge rating is 9 or lower. The creature is friendly to
you and your companions. It acts on each of your turns.
Vou decide what action it takes and how it moves. The
DM has the creature's statislics and resolves ali of its
actions and movement.
[f the spe11becomes permanent, you no longer control
the creature. It might remain friendly to you, depending
on how you have treated it.
Creature into Object. If you turn a creature into an
object, it transforms along with whatever it is wearing
and carrying into that formo The creature's statistics
become those of the object, and the creature has no
rÍlemory of time spent in this form, after the spe11ends
and it returns to its normal formo
TRUE RESURRECTION

9th.level necromancy
Casting Time: 1 hour
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (a sprinkle of holy water and
diamonds worth at least 25,000 gp, which the
spe11consumes)
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou touch a creature that has been dead for no longer
than 200 years and that died for any reason except
old age. If the creature's sou I is free and wi11ing,the
creature is restored to life with a11its hit points.
This spe11doses a11wounds, neutralizes any poison,
cures a11diseases, and lifts any curses affecting the
crealure when it died. The spell replaces damaged or
missing organs and limbs.
The spe11can even provi de a new body if the original
no longer exists, in which case you must speak the
creature's name, The creature then appears in an
unoccupied space you choose within 10 feet of you.
TRUE SEEING

6th.level divination
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V, S, M (an ointment for the eyes that
costs 25 gp; is made from mushroom powder, saffron,
and fat; and is consumed by the spe11)
Duration: 1 hou r
This spe11gives the willing creature you touch the ability
to see things as they actually are. For the duration, the
creature has truesight, notices secret doors hidden by
magic, and can see into the Ethereal Plane, ali out to a
range of 120 feet.
TRUE STRIKE

Divination cantrip
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 30 feet
Components: S
Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round
Vou extend your hand and point a finger at a target in
range. Vour magic grants you a brief insight into the
I'ART 3 I SI'ELLS

target's defenses. On your next turn, you gain advantage
on your first attack roll against lhe target, provided that
this spe11hasn't ended.
TSUNAMI

8th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I minute
Range: Sight
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentralion, up to 6 rounds
A wall of water springs into existence at a point you
choose within range, Vou can make the wall up to 300
feel long, 300 feet high, and 50 feet thick. The walllasts
for the duration.
When lhe wall appears, each creature within its area
must make a Strength saving throw. On a failed save,
a creature takes 6dlO bludgeoning damage, or half as
much damage on a successful save.
At the start of each of your turns after the wall
appears, the wa11,along with any creatures in it, moves
50 feet away from YOU. Any Huge or smaller creature
inside the wall or whose space the wall enters when
it moves must succeed on a Strength saving throw or
take 5dlO bludgeoning damage. A creature can take
this damage only once per round. At the end of the turn,
the wall's height is reduced by 50 feet, and the damage
creatures take from the spell on subsequent rounds is
reduced by IdlO. When the wa11reaches O feet in height,
the spe11ends.
A creature caught in the wall can move by swimming.
Because of the force of the wave, though, the creature
must make a successful Strength (Athletics) check
against your spell save DC in order to move at alI. If it
fails the check, it can't move, A creature that moves out
of the area faIls to the ground.
UNSEEN SERVANT

1st-levei conjuration (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S, M (a piece of string and
a bit of wood)
Duration: 1 hour
This speIl creates an invisible, mindless, shapeless
force that performs simple tasks at your command until
the speIl ends. The servant springs into existence in an
unoccupied space on the ground within range. It has AC
10, I hit point, and a Strength of 2, and it can't attack. [f
it drops to Ohit points, the speIl ends.
Once on each of your turns as a bonus action, you can
mentaIly command the servant to move up to 15 feet and
interact with an object. The servant can perform simple
tasks that a human servant could do, such as felching
things, c1eaning, mending, folding c1othes, lighting
fires, serving food, and pouring wine. Once you give the
command, the servant performs the task to the best of
its ability until it completes the task, then waits for your
next command.
If you command the servant to perform a task that
would move it more than 60 feet away from you,
the spe11ends.

VAMPIRIC TOUCH

WALL OF FORCE

3rd-Jevel necromancy

5th-leveI evocation

Casting Time: I action
Range: Self
Components: V, S
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute

Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a pinch of powder made by
crushing a clear gemstone)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes

The touch of your shadow-wreathed hand can siphon life
force from others to heal your wounds. Make a melee
spell attack against a creature wilhin your reach. On
a hit, the target takes 3d6 necrotic damage, and you
regain hit points equal to half the amount of necratic
damage dealt. Until the spell ends, you can make the
attack again on each of your turns as an action.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 4th levei ar higher, the damage increases by
Id6 for each slot levei above 3rd.
VICIOUS MOCKERY

Enchantmentcantrip
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou unleash a string of insults laced with subtle
enchantments at a creature you can see within range. lf
the target can hear you (though it need not understand
you), it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw ar take
Id4 psychic damage and have disadvantage on the next
attack rall it makes before the end of its next turo.
This spell's damage increases by Id4 when you reach
5th levei (2d4), 11th levei (3d4), and 17th levei (4d4).
WALL OF FIRE

4th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a small piece of phosphorus)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
Vou create a wall of fire on a solid surface within
range. Vou can make the wall up to 60 feet long, 20
feet high, and I foot thick, ar a ringed wall up to 20 feet
in diameter, 20 feet high, and I foot thick. The wall is
opaque and lasts for the duration.
When the wall appears, each creature within its area
must make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, a
creature takes 5d8 fire damage, ar half as much damage
on a successful save.
One side of the wall, selected by you when you cast
this spell, deals 5d8 fire damage to each creature lhat
ends its turo within 10 feet of that side ar inside the
wal!. A creature takes the same damage when it enters
the wall for the first time on a turo ar ends its turo there.
The other side of the wall deals no damage.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast lhis spell using a
spell slot of 5th levei ar higher, the damage increases by
Id8 for each slot levei above 4th.

An invisible wall of force springs into existence at a
point you choose within range. The wall appears in
any orientation you choose, as a horizontal ar vertical
barrier ar at an angle. It can be free floating ar resting
on a solid surface. Vou can form it into a hemispherical
dome ar a sphere with a radius of up to 10 feet, ar you
can shape a flat surface made up of ten IO-foot-byIO-foot panels. Each panel must be contiguous with
another pane!. In any form, the wall is 1/4 inch thick.
1t lasts for the duration. If the wall cuts through a
creature's space when it appears, the creature is pushed
to one side of the wall (your choice which side).
Nothing can physically pass through the wal!. It is
immune to ali damage and can't be dispelled by dispel
magic. A disintegrate spell destroys the wall instantly,
however. The wall also extends into the Ethereal Plane,
blocking ethereal travei through the wall.
WALL OF ICE

6th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a small piece of quartz)
Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes
Vou create a wall of ice on a solid surface within range.
Vou can form it into a hemispherical dome ar a sphere
with a radius of up to 10 feet, ar you can shape a flat
surface made up of ten IO-foot-square panels. Each
panel must be contiguous with another pane!. In any
form, the wall is I foot thick and lasts for the duration.
If the wall cuts through a creature's space when it
appears, the creature within its area is pushed to one
side of the wall and must make a Dexterity saving throw.
On a failed save, the creature takes IOd6 cold damage,
ar half as much damage on a successful save.
The wall is an object that can be damaged and thus
breached. 1t has AC 12 and 30 hit points per IO-foot
section, and it is vulnerable to fire damage. Reducing
a 10-foot section ofwall to O hit points destrays it and
leaves behind a sheet of frigid air in the space the wall
occupied. A creature moving thraugh the sheet of frigid
air for the first time on aturo must make a Constitution
saving thraw. That creature takes 5d6 cold damage on a
failed save, ar half as much damage on a successful one.
At Higher LeveIs. When you cast this spell using a
spell slot of 7th levei ar higher, the damage the wall
deals when it appears increases by 2d6, and the damage
fram passing through the sheet of frigid air increases by
Id6, for each slot levei above 6th.

PAR'I 3 I SPELLS

WALL OF STONE

5th-leveI evocation
Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 120 feel
Components: V,S, M (a small block of granile)
Duration: Concenlralion, up lO 10 minules
A nonmagical wall of solid slone springs inlo exislence
aI a poinl you choose wilhin range. The wa11is 6 inches
lhick and is composed of len lO-foOl-by-lO-foOI
panels.
Each panel musl be conliguous wilh alleasl one olher
pane!. AIlernatively. you can creale 10-foOl-by-20-fool
panels lhat are only 3 inches lhick.
If lhe wall culs lhrough a crealure's space when il
appears, lhe crealure is pushed lo one side of lhe wa11
(your choice). lf a creature would be surrounded on a11
sides by lhe wa11(or lhe wa11and anolher solid surface),
lhal crealure can make a Dexlerity saving lhrow. On a
success, il can use ils reaclion lo move up lo ils speed so
lhat il is no longer enclosed by lhe wall.
The wall can have any shape you desire, lhough il
can'l occupy lhe same space as a crealure or objecl.
The wall doesn'l need lo be verlical or resl on any firm
foundalion. It musl. however, merge wilh and be solidly
supporled by exisling slone. Thus, you can use lhis spell
lo bridge a chasm or creale a ramp.
Ifyou creale a span grealer lhan 20 feel in lenglh, you
musl halve lhe size of each panello creale supporls.
Vou can crudely shape lhe walllo creale crenellalions,
balllemenls, and so on.
The wall is an objecl ma de of stone that can be
damaged and lhus breached. Each panel has AC 15 and
30 hit points per inch of thickness. Reducing a panel
lo O hit points destroys it and might cause connected
panels to collapse aI the DM's discrelion.
lf you maintain your concentralion on this spell for
its whole duralion, the wall becomes permanenl and
can't be dispelled. Olherwise, lhe wall disappears when
the spell ends.

make a Dexlerily saving throw. It takes 7d8 slashing
damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a
successful one.
At Hil1her LeveIs. When you casllhis spe11using a
spe11slol of 71h levei or higher, boIh lypes of damage
increase by Id8 for each slollevel above 61h.
WARDING

BOND

2nd-leveI abjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: Touch
Components: V,S, M (a pair of plalinum rings worlh aI
leasl 50 gp each, which you and lhe largel musl wear
for lhe duralion)
Duration: 1 hour
This spell wards a willing crealure you louch and
creales a myslic conneclion belween you and lhe largel
unlillhe spell ends. While lhe largel is wilhin 60 feel of
you. il gains a +1 bonus lo AC and saving lhrows, and
il has resislance lo ali damage. AIso, each lime il lakes
damage, you lake lhe same amount of damage.
The spell ends if you drop lo Ohil poinls or if you
and lhe largel become separaled by more lhan 60 feel.
It also ends if lhe spell is casl again on eilher of lhe
connecled crealures. Vou can also dismiss lhe spell
as an aclion.
WATER BREATHING

3rd-Ievel transmutation (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V,S, M (a shorl reed or piece of slraw)
Duration: 24 hours
This spell granls up lo ten willing crealures you can see
wilhin range lhe abilily lo brealhe underwaler unlillhe
spell ends. Affecled crealures also relain lheir normal
mode of respiralion.
WATERWALK

WALL

OF THORNS

6th-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feel
Components: V,S, M (a handful of lhorns)
Duration: Concenlralion, up to 10 minules
Vou creale a wa11of lough, pliable. langled brush
brislling with needle-sharp lhorns. The wa11appears
within range on a solid surface and lasls for lhe
duralion. Vou choose lOmake lhe wall up lo 60 feel
long, 10 feel high, and 5 feellhick or a circle lhal has
a 20-fool diameler and is up lo 20 feel high and 5 feel
lhick. The wall blocks line of sighl.
When lhe wall appears, each crealure wilhin ils area
musl make a Dexlerily saving lhrow. On a failed save,
a crealure lakes 7d8 piercing damage, or half as much
damage on a successful save.
A crealure can move lhrough lhe wall, albeil slowly
and painfully. For every 1 fool a creature moves
lhrough lhe wa11,il musl spend 4 feel of movemenl.
Furlhermore, lhe firsllime a crealure enlers lhe wall
on a lurn or ends its lurn lhere, lhe crealure musl

3rd-Ievel transmutation (ritual)
Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 30 feel
Components: V, S, M (a piece of cork)
Duration: 1 hour
This spell granls lhe abilily lo move across any Iiquid
surface-such as waler, acid, mud, snow, quicksand,
or lava-as if il were harmless solid ground (crealures
crossing mollen lava can slilllake damage from lhe
heal). Up lo len willing crealures you can see wilhin
range gain lhis abilily for the duralion.
lf you largel a crealure submerged in a Iiquid, the
spell carries lhe largello lhe surface of the liquid aI a
rale of 60 feel per round.
WEB

2nd-leveI conjuration
Casting Time: 1 aclion
Range: 60 feel
Components: V,S, M (a bil of spiderweb)
Duration: Concenlration, up to 1 hour

PART.3

Pil

Vou conjure a mass of thiek, stieky webbing at a point of
your ehoice within range, The webs fill a 20-foot eube
from that point for the duration, The webs are diffieult
terrain and lightly obseure their area.
If the webs aren't anehored between two solid masses
(sueh as walls or trees) or layered aeross a floar, wall,
or eeiling, the eonjured web eollapses on itself, and the
spell ends at the start of your next turn. Webs layered
over a flat surfaee have a depth of 5 feel.
Eaeh ereature that starts its turn in the webs or that
enters them during its turn must make a Dexterity
saving throw. On a failed save, the ereature is restrained
as long as it remains in the webs or until it breaks free.
A ereature restrained by the webs ean use its aetion to
make a Strength eheek against your spell save De. If it
sueeeeds, it is no longer restrained.
The webs are flammable. Any 5-foot eube of webs
exposed to fire burns away in 1 round, dealing 2d4 fire
damage to any ereature that starts its turn in the /ire.
WEIRD

9th-levei illusion
Casting Time: 1 aetion
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: Coneentration, up to one minute
Drawing on the deepest fears of a group of ereatures,
you ereate illusory ereatures in their minds, visible
only to them. Eaeh ereature in a 30-foot-radius
sphere eentered on a point of your ehoice within
range must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed
save, a ereature beeomes frightened for the duration.
The illusion ealls on the ereature's deepest fears,
manifesting its worst nightmares as an implaeable
threal. At the start of eaeh of the frightened ereature's
turns, it must sueeeed on a Wisdom saving throw or
take 4dlO psyehie damage. On a sueeessful save, the
spell ends for that ereature.
WIND WALK

6th-levei transmutation
Casting Time: I minute
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (/ire and holy water)
Duration: 8 hours

Vou and up to ten willing ereatures you ean see
within range assume a gaseous form for the duration,
appearing as wisps of c1oud. While in this c10ud form,
a ereature has a flying speed of 300 feet and has
resistanee to damage from nonmagieal weapons. The
only aetions a ereature ean take in this form are the
Dash aetion or to revert to its normal formo Reverting
takes I minute, during whieh time a ereature is
ineapacitated and ean't move. Until the spell ends, a
ereature ean revert to c10ud form, whieh also requires
the I-minute transformation.
If a ereature is in c10ud form and flying when the effeet
ends, the ereature deseends 60 feet per round for 1
minute until it lands, which it does safely. If it ean't land
after 1 minute, the ereature falls the remaining distanee.
WINDWALL

3rd-/evel evocation
Casting Time: 1 action
Range: 120 feet
Components: V, S, M (a tiny fan and a feather of
exotic origin)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
A wall of strong wind rises from the ground at a point
you choose within range. Vou ean make the wall up
to 50 feet long, 15 feet high, and 1 foot thick. Vou ean
shape the wall in any way you ehoose so long as it
makes one continuous path along the ground. Thewall
lasts for the duration.
When the wall appears, each creature within its area
must make a Strength saving throw. A ereature takes
3d8 bludgeoning damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one.
The strong wind keeps fog, smoke, and other gases at
bay. Small or smaller flying ereatures or objects can't
pass through the wall. Loose, Iightweight materiais
brought into the wall fly upward. Arrows, bolts, and
other ordinary projectiles launehed at targets behind
the wall are deflected upward and automatically miss.
(Boulders hurled by giants or siege engines, and similar
projectiles, are unaffeeted.) Creatures in gaseous form
can't pass through il.
WISH

9th-levei conjuration
Casting Time: I aelion
Range: Self
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Wish is the mightiest spell a mortal ereature can
easl. By simply speaking aloud, you can alter the very
foundations of reality in accord with your desires.
The basic use of this spell is to duplieate any other
spell of 8th levei or lower. Vou don't need to meet any
requirements in that spell, including costly eomponents.
The spell simply takes effecl.
Alternatively, you ean ereate one of the following
effecls of your ehoice:
Vou ereale one object of up to 25,000 gp in value thal
isn't a magic item. The objeel ean be no more than

288

PART 3

I SPELLS

300 feet in any dimension, and it appears in an unoccupied space you can see on the ground,
Vou allow up to twenty creatures that you can see to
regain ali hit points, and you end ali effects on them
described in the greater restoration spel!.
Vou grant up to ten creatures that you can see resistance to a damage type you choose.
Vou grant up to ten creatures you can see immunity to
a single spell or other magical effect for 8 hours. For
instance, you could make yourself and ali your companions immune to a Iich's Iife drain attack.
Vou undo a single recent event by forcing a reroll of
any roll made within the last round (including your
last tum). Reality reshapes itself to accommodate the
new result. For example, a wish spell could undo an
opponent's successful save, a foe's criticai hit, or a
friend's failed save. Vou can force the reroll to be made
with advantage or disadvantage, and you can choose
whether to use the reroll or the original roll.
Vou might be able to achieve something beyond the
scope of the above examples. State your wish to the DM
as precisely as possible. The DM has great latitude in
ruling what occurs in such an instance; the greater the
wish, the greater the Iikelihood that something goes
wrong. This spell might simply fail, the effect you desire
might only be partly achieved, or you might suffer some
unforeseen consequence as a result of how you worded
the wish. For example, wishing that a villain were dead
might propel you forward in time to a period when that
villain is no longer alive, effectively removing you from
the game. Similarly, wishing for a legendary magic item
or artifact might instantly transport you to the presence
of the item's current owner.
The stress of casting this spell to produce any effect
other than duplicating another spell weakens you. After
enduring that stress, each time you cast a spell until
you finish a long rest, you take IdlO necrotic damage
per leveI of that spel!. This damage can't be reduced or
prevented in any way. In addition, your Strength drops
to 3, if it isn't 3 or lower already, for 2d4 days. For each
of those days that you spend resting and doing nothing
more than Iight activity, your remaining recovery time
decreases by 2 days. Finally, there is a 33 percent
chance that you are unable to cast wish ever again if you
suffer this stress.
WITCH BOLT

1st-levei evocation
Casting Time: I action
Range: 30 feet
Components: V, S, M (a twig from a tree that has been
struck by lightning)
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
A beam of crackling, blue energy lances out toward
a creature within range, forming a sustained are of
Iightning between you and the target. Make a ranged
spell attack against that creature. On a hit, the target
takes Idl2 lightning damage, and on each ofyour tums
for the duration, you can use your action to deal ldl2
lightning damage to the target automatically. The spell
ends if you use your action to do anything else. The spell

also ends if the target is ever outside the spell's range or
if it has total cover from you.
At Higher Leveis. When you cast this spell using
a spell slot of 2nd levei ar higher, the initial damage
increases by ldl2 for each slot levei above 1st.
WORD OF RECALL

6th-ievel conjuration
Casting Time: I action
Range: 5 feet
Components: V
Duration: Instantaneous
Vou and up to five willing creatures within 5 feet of you
instantly teleport to a previously designated sanctuary.
Vou and any creatures that teleport with you appear in
the nearest unoccupied space to the spot you designated
when you prepared your sanctuary (see below). ]f you
cast this spell without first preparing a sanctuary, the
spell has no effect.
Vou must designate a sanctuary by casting this spell
within a location, such as a temple, dedicated to or
strongly Iinked to your deity. If you attempt to cast the
spell in this manner in an area that isn't dedicated to
your deity, the spell has no effect.
WRATHFUL

SMITE

1st-ievei evocation
Casting Time: I bonus action
Range:Self
Components: V
Duration: Concentration, up to I minute
The next time you hit with a melee weapon attack
during this spell's duration, your attack deals an extra
Id6 psychic damage. Additionally, if the target is a
creature, it must make a Wisdom saving throw or be
frightened of you until the spell ends. As an action, the
creature can make a Wisdom check against your spell
save DC to steel its resolve and end this spel!.
ZONE OF TRUTH

2nd-ievei enchantment
Casting Time: I action
Range: 60 feet
Components: V, S
Duration: 10 minutes
Vou create a magical zone that guards against deception
in a 15-foot-radius sphere centered on a point of your
choice within range. Until the spell ends, a creature
that enters the spell's area for the first time on atum
or starts its tum there must make a Charisma saving
throw. On a failed save, a creature can't speak a
deliberate lie while in the radius. Vou know whether
each creature succeeds or fails on its saving throw.
An affected creature is aware of the spell and can thus
avoid answering questions to which it would normally
respond with alie. Such a creature can be evasive in
its answers as long as it remains within the boundaries
af lhe lrulh.

PART 3

I SPELLS

289

ApPENDIX A: CONDITIONS
ONDITIONS

ALTER A CREATURE'S

CAPABIUTlES

IN

a variety of ways and can arise as a result of
a spell, a class feature, a monster's attack,
or other effect, Most conditions, such as
blinded, are impairments, but a few, such as
invisible, can be advantageous,
A condition lasts either until it is countered
(the prone condition is countered by standing
up, for example) or for a duration specified by the effect
that imposed the condition,
If multi pie effects impose the same condition on a
creature, each instance of the condition has its own
duration, but the condition's effects don't get worse,
A creature either has a condition or doesn't.
The following definitions specify what happens to
a creature while it is subjected to a condition,
BUNDED

A blinded creature can't see and automatically fails
any ability check that requires sight.
Atlack rolls against the creature have advantage. and
the creature's atlack ralls have disadvantage,
CHARMED

A charmed creature can't attack the charmer or target
the charmer with harmful abilities or magical effects,

The charmer has advantage on any ability check to
interact socially with the creature,
DEAFENED

• A deafened creature can't hear and automatically fails
any ability check that requires hearing,
FRIGHTENED

A frightened creature has disadvantage on ability
checks and attack rolls while the source of its fear is
within line of sight.
The creature can't willingly move closer to the source
of its fear,
GRAPPLED

A grappled creature's speed becomes O,and it can't
benefit from any bonus to its speed.
The condition ends if the grappler is incapacitated
(see the condition),
The condition also ends if an effect removes the
grappled creature fram the reach of the grappler or
grappling effect, such as when a creature is hurled
away by the thunderwave spell.
INCAPACITATED

An incapacitated creature can't take actions or
reactions.

••

INVISIBLE

•••

EXHAUSTION

An invisible creature is impossible to see without the
aid of magic or a special sense. For the purpose of
hiding, the creature is heavily obscured. The creature's location can be detected by any noise it makes
or any tracks it leaves.
Attack rolls against the creature have disadvantage,
and the creature's attack rolls have advantage.
PARALYZED

A paralyzed creature is incapacitated (see the condition) and can't move or speak.
The creature aulomatically fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws.
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.
Any attack that hits the creature is a criticai hit if the
attacker is within 5 feet of the creature.
PETRIFIED

A petrified creature is transformed, along with any
nonmagical object it is wearing or carrying, into a
solid inanimate substance (usually stone). Its weight
increases by a factor of ten, and it ceases aging.
The creature is incapacitated (see the condition), can't
move or speak, and is unaware of its surroundings.
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage.
The creature automatically fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws.
The creature has resistance to ali damage.
The creature is immune to poison and disease,
although a poison or disease already in its system
is suspended, not neutralized.

Some special abilities and environmental hazards, such as
starvation and the long-term effects offreezing or scorching
temperatures,
can lead to a special condition called
exhaustion. Exhaustion is measured in six leveis. An effect
can give a creature one or more leveis Df exhaustion, as

specified in the effect's description.
Levei
1
2
3
4
5
6

Elfeel
Disadvantage on ability checks
Speed halved
Disadvantage on attack rolls and saving throws
Hit point maximum halved
Speed reduced to O
Death

If an already exhausted

creature suffers another effeet that

causes exhaustion, its current levei af exhaustion increases

by the amount specified in the effect's description.
A creature suffers the effect ofits current levei of
exhaustion as well as alllower leveis. For example, a creature
suffering levei 2 exhaustion has its speed halved and has
disadvantage on ability checks.
An effect that removes exhaustion reduces its levei as
specified in the effect's description, with ali exhaustion
effects ending if a creature's exhaustion levei is reduced
below 1.
Finishing a long rest reduces a creature's exhaustion levei
by 1, provided that the creature has also ingested some
food and drink.

INVISIBLE

DEAFENEO

APPENDIX A.

CONDITIONS

PorSONED

A poisoned creature has disadvantage on attack rolls
and ability checks.
PRONE

A prone creature's only movement option is to crawl,
unless it stands up and thereby ends the condition.
The creature has disadvantage on attack rolls.
An attack roll against the creature has advantage
if the attacker is within 5 feet of the creature.
Otherwise, the attack roll has disadvantage.
RESTRAINED

A restrained creature's speed becomes 0, and it can't
benefit from any bonus to its speed.
Attack rolls against the creature have advantage,
and the creature's attack rolls have disadvantage.
The creature has disadvantage on Dexterity
saving throws.
STUNNED

A stunned creature is incapacitated (see the
condition), can't move, and can speak only
falteringly.
The creature automatica11y fails Strength
and Dexterity saving throws.
Attack ro11sagainst the creature have
advantage.
UNCONSCIOUS

An unconscious creature is incapacitated (see
the condition), can't move or speak, and is unaware
of its surroundings
The creature drops whatever it's holding and fa11s
prone.
The creature automatica11y fails Strength and
Dexterity saving throws.
Attack ro11sagainst the creature have advantage.
Any altack that hits the creature is a criti.
cal hit if the attacker is within 5 feet
of the creature.

PRONE

ReSTRAINEO

o

•• •
o

• •

o

()

UNCONSCIOUS

STUNNEO
APPENDIX

A I CONDITIONS

B: GODS OF THE MULTIVERSE

ApPENDIX
ELIGION

ISAN

IMPORTANT

PART OF LIFE IN

GREYHAWK

THE worlds

of the D&D multiverse. When
gods walk the world, clerics channel divine
power, evil cults perform dark sacrifices in
subterranean lairs, and shining paladins
stand Iike beacons against the darkness, it's
hard to be ambivalent about the deities and
deny thei r existence.
Many people in the worlds of D&D worship different
gods at different times and eircumstances. People in
the Forgotten Realms, for example. might pray to Sune
for luck in love, make an offering to Waukeen before
heading to the market, and pray to appease Talos when
a severe storm blows in-ali in the same day. Many
people have a favorite among the gods, one whose ideais
and teachings they make their own. And a few people
dedicate themselves entirely to a single god, usually
serving as a priest or champion of lhat god's ideais.
Your DM determines which gods, if any, are worshiped
in his or her campaign. From among the gods available,
you can choose a single deity for your character to
serve, worship, or pay Iip service to. ar you can pick
a few that your character prays to most often. ar just
make a mental note of lhe gods who are revered in your
DM's campaign so you can invoke their names when
appropriate. ]f you're playing a deric or a character with
the Acolyte background, decide which god your deity
serves or served, and consider the deity's suggested
domains when selecting your character's domain.

D&D PANTHEONS
Each world in the D&D multiverse has its own
pantheons of deities, ranging in size from the teeming
pantheons of the Forgotten Realms and Greyhawk to
the more focused religions of Eberron and Dragonlance.
Many of the nonhuman races worship the same gods on
different worlds-Moradin, for example, is revered by
dwarves of the Forgotten Realms, Greyhawk, and many
other worlds.
THE

FORGOTTEN

REALMS

Dozens of deities are revered, worshiped, and feared
throughout the world of the Forgotten Realms. At least
thirly deities are widely known across the Realms, and
many more are worshiped locally, by individual tribes,
small cults, or certain sects of larger religious tem pies.
"""

THE lIFE

ANO DEATH

DOMAINS

••

DRAGONLANCE

The gods of the world of Krynn are three families: seven
gods of good headed by Paladine and Mishakal, seven of
neutrality headed by Gilean, and seven of evil headed by
Takhisis and Sargonnas. These deities have been called
by many different names and held in varying leveis of
esteem by different peoples and cultures through the
world's history, but they are the only gods of this worldtheir place fixed in the stars as constellations.
EBERRON

The world of Eberron has many different religions, but
the most important revolves around a pantheon called
the Sovereign Host and their malign shadow, the Dark
Six. The gods of the Sovereign Host are thought to have
dominion over every aspect of existence, and to speak
with a unified voice. But the Dark Six are the primitive,
bloody, and cruel gods who offer a dissenting voice.
Eberron's other religions are very different from the
traditional D&D pantheons. The monotheistic Church
of the Silver Flame is devoted to fighting against evil in
the world, but plagued by corruption in its own ranks.
The philosophy of the Blood of Vol teaches that divinity
Iies within ali mortal beings and reveres the undead
who have secured lhat immortality. Various mad cults
are devoted to the demons and horrors imprisoned
in Eberron's Underdark (called Khyber, lhe Dragon
Below). The followers of the Path of Light believe that
the world is heading toward a glorious future where
the shadows that cloud this world will be transformed
into Iight. And two relaled nations of e1ves revere their
ancestral spirits: lhe Undying Court, preserved as
spirits or even undead forms, and the glorified Spirits
of the Past, the great heroes of aneient wars.
NONHUMAN

•••

Many deities in this section suggest the Life domain,
particularly if they are dosely associated with healing,
protection, childbirth, nurturing, ar fertility. As described in
the chapter 3, though, the Life domain is incredibly broad,
and a deric of any non-evil deity can choose il.
A number of other deities, mostly evil ones, suggest the
Death domain, which is detailed in the Dungeon Mas!er's
Cuide. Most derics who choose this domain are evil N PCs,
but if you want to worship a god af death, consult your
Dungeon Master .

The gods of Greyhawk come from at least four different
pantheons, representing the faiths of the various ethnic
groups that populated lhe continent of Oerik over the
ages. As a result, there's a great deal of overlap in lheir
portfolios: Pelor is the Flan god of the sun and Pholtus
is the Oeridian sun god, for example.

••

DEITIES

Certain gods closely associated with nonhuman races
are revered on many different worlds, though not always
in the same way. The nonhuman races of the Forgotten
Realms and Greyhawk share these deities.
Nonhuman races often have whole pantheons of
their own. Besides Moradin, for example, the dwarf
gods include Moradin's wife, Berronar Truesilver, and
a number of other gods thought to be their children
and grandchildren: Abbathor, Clangeddin Silverbeard,
Dugmaren Brightmantle, Dumathoin, Gorm Gullhyn,
Haela Brightaxe, Marthammor Duin, Sharindlar, Thard
Harr, and Vergadain. Individual dans and kingdoms of
dwarves might revere some, ali, or none of these deities,
and some have other gods unknown (or known by other
names) to outsiders.

APPENOIX

B I CO os OF THE

MULTIVERSE

293

DEITIES

OF THE FORGOTTEN

REALMS

Deity

Alignment

Suggested

Domains

NE

Nature, Tempest

Six.pointed

LN

Left hand pointing upward, outlined

Bane, god of tyranny
Beshaba, goddess of misfortune

LE

Knowledge
War

snowflake
in fire

Trickery
Death

Upright black right hand, thumb and fingers together
Black antlers
Skull surrounded bya ring of blood droplets

CE

Life
Trickery

Sheaf of grain or a blooming rose over grain
White jawless skull on black or purple sunburst

Deneir, god ofwriting

NG

Knowiedge

Eldath, goddess of peace
Gond, god of craft

NG

Life, Nature
Knowledge

Lit candle above an open eye
Waterfall plunging into still pool

Helm, god of protection
limater, god of endurance

LN

Kelemvor, god of the dead
Lathander, god of birth and renewal

LN
NG

Leira, goddess
L1iira, goddess

of i1lusion
of joy

CN
CG

Loviatar, goddess of pain
Malar, god of the hunt

LE
CE

CE

Bhaal, god of murder
Chauntea, goddess of agriculture

NG

Cyric, god of lies

NE

N
LG

Mask, god of thieves
Mielikki, goddess of forests

CN

Milil, god of poetry and song
Myrkul, god of death

NG

Mystra, goddess

of magic

NG

god of knowledge

N

Savras, god of divination and fate
SelOne, goddess of the moon
Shar, goddess of darkness and 1055

CG

Oghma,

NG

NE

LN

Toothed cog with four spokes
Staring eye on upright left gauntlet
Hands bound at the wrist with red cord

Life, Light
Life
Death
Life, Light
Trickery

Upright skeletal arm holding balanced scales
Road traveling into a sunrise
Point.down triangle containing a swirl of mist

Life

Triangle of three six.pointed

Death

Nine.tailed

Nature
Trickery
Nature

Clawed paw
Black mask
Unicorn's head
Five.stringed harp made of leaves

Light
Death
Knowledge

stars

barbed scourge

White human skull
Orcle af seven stars, or nine stars encircling a

flowing red mist, or a single star
Blank scroll

Knowledge
Knowledge

Crystal ball containing many kinds of eyes
Pair of eyes surrounded by seven stars

Silvanus, god of wild nature
Sune, goddess of love and beauty

N

Knowledge, Life
Death, Trickery
Nature

CG

Life, Light

Black disk encircled with a border
Oak leaf
Face of a beautiful red.haired woman

Talona, goddess of disease and poison
Talos, god of storms

CE
CE

Tempus, god of war
Torm, god of courage and self.sacrifice

Death
Tempest
War

Three teardrops on a triangle
Three lightning bolts radiating from a central point
Upright flaming sword

LG

War
Trickery

White right gauntlet
Face.up coin

War
Tempest
Knowledge, Trickery

Balanced scales resting on a warhammer
Wave curling left and right
Upright coin with Waukeen's profile facing left

NE

N

Tymora, goddess of good fortune
Tyr, god of justice
Umberlee, goddess of the sea

CG

Waukeen, goddess

N

of trade

LG

CE

\

294

Symbol

Auril, goddess of winter
Azuth, god of wizards

APPEN[)IX

B i OODS

OF TIIE

MULTIVERSE

DElllES

OF GREYHAWK

Deity
Beory, goddess

of nature

Domains

Suggested

N

Nature

Green disk
Eye within a pentagram
Arc of seven stars inside a cirele

Boccob, god of magic

N

Knowledge

Ce[estian, god of stars and wanderers

N

Ehlonna, goddess

NG

Knowledge
Life, Nature

of woodlands

Erythnul, god of envy and slaughter
Fharlanghn, god ofhorizons and travei

NG

Heironeous,

LG

War

god of chivalry and valor

Kord, god of athletics

and sport

CE

Unicorn horn

War
Know[edge, lrickery

Hextor, god of war and discord

Symbol

Alignment

LE

War

CG

lempest,

War

Blood drop
Cirele crossed

Lightning bolt
Six arrows facing downward

by a curved horizon line
in a fan

Four spears and four maces radiating out
from a central point

Incabulos,

god of plague and famine

Istus, goddess

of fate and destiny

NE

Death

Reptilian eye with a horizontal

N

Know[edge

Weaver's spindle with three strands

diamond

luz, god of pain and oppression

CE

Death

Grinning human skull

Nerull, god of death
Obad.Hai, god of nature

NE

Death

Skull with either a sickle or a scythe

N

Nature

Oak leaf and acorn

Olidammara,

CN

lrickery

Pelor, god ofthe sun and hea[ing
Pholtus, god of [ight and law

NG

Life, Light
Light

Laughing mask
Sun
Silver sun or fu[1 moon partia[ly eelipsed bya

Ralishaz, god of illluck and insanity
Rao, god of peace and reason
St. Cuthbert, god of common sense and zeal
lharizdun, god of eterna[ darkness

CN
LG
LN

Trithereon, god ofliberty and retribution
Ulaa, goddess of hills and mountains

CG
LG
NE

god of revelry

Vecna, god of evil secrets
Wee las, goddess of magic and death

DElllES

LG

CE

LN

smaller crescent moon
Three bone fate.casting

Trickery
Know[edge

sticks

White heart
Cirele at the center of a starburst

Knowledge
Trickery

of [ines

Dark spiral or inverted ziggurat

War
Life, War

lriskelion
Mountain with a cirele at its heart

Knowledge
Death, Knowledge

Hand with eye in the paim
Red skull in front of fireba[1

OF DRAGONLANCE

Alignment

lhe Gods of Good
Paladine, god of rulers and guardians
Branchala, god of music
Habbakuk, god of animal rife and the sea
Kiri.Jolith, god ofhonor and war
Majere, god of meditation and order
Mishakal, goddess of healing
Solinari, god of good magic
lhe Gods of Neutrality

LG
NG
NG
LG
LG
LG
LG

Suggested

Domains

War
Light
Nature, Tempest
War
Knowledge
Knowledge,

Life

Symbol
Silver triangle
Bard's harp
Blue bird
Bison's horns
Copper spider
B[ue infinity sign
White circle or sphere

no c1erics

Alignment

Suggested

Gilean, god ofknowledge
Chis[ev, goddess of nature

N
N

Knowledge

Open book

Reorx, god of craft
Shinare, goddess of wea[th and trade

N
N
N

Nature
Know[edge
Knowledge, Trickery

Feather
Forging hammer
Griffon's wing
Mu[ti.colored fire

Sirrion, god offire and change
Zivilyn, god of wisdom
Lunitari, goddess

of neutral magic

lhe Gods of Evil
Takhisis, goddess of night and hatred
Chemosh, god of the undead
Hiddukel, god oflies and greed
Morgion, god of disease and secrecy
Sargonnas, god ofvengeance
and fire
Zeboim, goddess of the sea and storms
Nuitari, god of evil magic

N
N
Alignment

Domains

Nature
Knowledge

Great green or gold tree
Red circ[e or sphere

no c1erics

Suggested

Symbol

Domains

Symbol

LE

Death

B[ack crescent

LE
CE
NE
LE
CE
LE

Death
Trickery
Death
War
Tempest
no derics

Ye[low skull
Broken merchant's

scales

Hood with two red eyes
Sty[ized red condor
Turtle shell
Black cirele or sphere

APPENDIX

B I GODS

OF THE

MULTI"

ERSE

295

DEITIES

OF EBERRON

The Sovereign Hosl

Alignmenl

Suggesled

Arawai, goddess offerlilily
Aureon, god oflaw and knowledge

NG
LN

Life, Nalure
Knowledge

Balinor, god ofbeasls and lhe hunl
Boldrei, goddess of communily and home

N
LG
LG

Life, Nalure
Life

CG
N
NG

War
Trickery
Life, Trickery

Longsword crossed over a shield
Nine-sided gold coin

NG

Knowledge

Crossed hammer

Doi Arrah, goddess

of sunlighl and honor

Doi Dorn, god of slrenglh aI arms
Kol Korran, god of Irade and weallh
Olladra, goddess of good forlune
Onalar, god of crafl
The Dark Si.

Domains

Symbol
Sheaf of wheallied
Open lome
Pair of anllers

wilh green ribbon

Fire in a slone hearlh
Rising sun

Lighl, War

Domino

Alignmenl

Suggesled

The Devourer, god of nature's wralh

NE

Tempest

The Fury, goddess

NE

War

The Keeper, god of greed and dealh

NE

Death

The Mockery, god of violence and treachery
The Shadow, god of dark magic
The Traveler, deity of chaos and change

NE
CE
CN

War
Knowledge
Knowledge, Trickery

Obsidian tower
Four crossed, rune-inscribed

Suggesled

Symbol

ofwralh

and madness

Domains

and tongs

Symbol
Bundle of five sharpened bones
Winged wyrm wilh woman's head and
upper body

Olher Failhs of Eberron

Alignmenl

The Silver Flame, deily of protection
The Blood ofVol, philosophy

and good

ofimmortality

and undeath
Cults of the Dragon Below, deities of madness
The PaI h of Light, philosophy of light and

Domains

Dragonshard stone in the shape of a fang
Five blood-spatlered
tools
bones

LG

Life, Light, War

Flame drawn on silver or molded from silver

LN

Death, Life

Slylized dragon skull on red teardrop

NE
LN

Trickery
Life, Lighl

Varies

Brilliant cryslal

self-improvemenl
The Undying Courl, elven ancestors
The Spirits of the Past, elven ancestors

NONHUMAN

Knowledge,

CG

War

Life

Varies

Varies

DEITIES

Deily

Alignmenl

Suggesled

Bahamut, dragon god of good
Blibdoolpoolp, kuo-toa goddess

LG
NE

Life, War

Dragon's

Corellon Larethian,

CG
CG
N

Death
Light

Lobster head or black pearl
Quarter moon or starburst

Nature, Tempest
Nature, Tempest

Dolphin
Spiral design

Trickery
War
Tempest,

Gold nugget
Wooden c1ub

elf deity of art and magic

Deep Sashelas, elf god of the sea
Eadro, merfolk deity ofthe sea
Gari Glitlergold, gnome god oflrickery

and wiles

Grolantor, hill giant god of war
Gruumsh, ore god of storms and war
Hruggek, bugbear god ofviolence
Kurtulmak, kobold god of war and mining
Laogzed, troglodyte god ofhunger
Lolth, drow goddess of spiders
Maglubiyel, goblinoid god of war
Moradin, dwarf god of crealion
Rillifane Rallathil, wood elf god of nature
Sehanine Moonbow, elf goddess of the moon
Sekolah, sahuagin god of lhe hunt
Semuanya, lizardfolk deity of survival
Skerrit, centaur and satyr god of nature
Skoraeus Stonebones, god of stone gianls and arl
Surlur, god offire giants and craft
Thrym, god of frost giants and strength
Tiamat, dragon goddess of evil
Yondalla, halfling goddess of ferlility and protection

296

NG

APPEND1X

B I GODS

or THE

MU LTIVERSE

LG
CE
CE
CE
LE

War

War
War

CE
CE

Death
Trickery

LE
LG

War
Knowledge
Nature

CG
CG
LE
N
N
N
LE
CE
LE
LG

Domains

Knowledge
Nature, Tempesl
Life
Nature
Knowledge
Knowledge, War
War
Trickery
Life

Symbol
head in profile

Unblinking eye
Morningstar
Gnome skull
Image ofthe lizardjload

god

Spider
Bloodyaxe
Hammer

and anvil

Oak
Crescent moon

Shark
Egg
Oak growing from acorn
Slalactite
Flaming sword
White double-bladed
axe
Dragon head with five claw marks
Shield

gem

FANTASy-HISTORICAL

PANTHEONS

The Celtic, Egyptian, Greek, and Norse pantheons are
fantasy interpretations of historical religions from our
world's ancient times. They include deities tha! are
most appropriate for use in a 0&0 game, divorced from
their historical context in the real world and united into
pantheons that serve the needs of the game.
THE CELTlC

PANTHEON

It's said that something wild lurks in the heart of every
soul, a space that thrills to the sound of geese calling
aI night, to the whispering wind through the pines, to
the unexpected red of mistletoe on an oak-and it is in
this space that the Celtic gods dwell. They sprang from
the brook and stream, their might heighlened by lhe
strength of the oak and lhe beauty of the woodlands and
open moor. When the first forester dared put a name to
the face seen in the bole of a tree or the voice babbling
in a brook, these gods forced themselves into being.
The Celtic gods are as often served by druids as by
c1erics. for they are c10sely aligned with the forces of
nature lhat druids revere.
THE GREEK PANTHEON

The gods of Olympus make lhemselves known wilh the
gentle lap of waves against the shores and lhe crash of
the thunder among the c1oud-enshrouded peaks. The
thick boar-infested woods and the sere, olive-covered
hillsides hold evidence of their passing. Everyaspect
of nature echoes with their presence, and they've made
a place for themselves inside the human hearl, 100.
THE EGYPTIAN

PANTHEON

These gods are a young dynasty of an ancienl divine
family, heirs to the rulership of lhe cosmos and lhe
mainlenance of the divine principie of Ma'al-lhe
fundamental order of lrulh, juslice, law, and order lhal
puts gods, mortal pharaohs, and ordinary men and
women in lhcir logical and rightful place in lhe universe.
The Egyptian panlheon is unusual in having lhree
gods wilh the Dealh domain of differenl alignmenls.
Anubis is lhe lawful neulral god of lhe aflerlife, who

judges lhe souls of lhe dead. Set is a chaotic evil god
of murder, perhaps besl known for killing his brother
Osiris. And Nephlhys is a chaolic good goddess of
mourning. Thus, allhough most c1erics of lhe Dealh
domain (found in lhe Dungeon Master's Cuide) are
villainous characlers,
c1erics who serve Anubis or
Nephlhys need nol be.
THE NORSE PANTHEON
Where lhe land plummels from the snowy hills inlo lhe
icy fjords below, where lhe longboals draw up on lo lhe
beach, where the glaciers flow forward and relreal wilh
every fali and spring-lhis
is lhe land of the Vikings,
the home of lhe Norse panlheon. It's a brulal clime,
and one lhal calls for brulalliving.
The warriors of
the land have had lo adapl lo lhe harsh condilions in
order lO survive, but lhey haven't been 100 lwisled by

CELTIC

lhe needs of lheir environment.
Given lhe necessity of
raiding for food and wealth, il's surprising
lhe mortais
lurned out as well as lhey did. Their powers reflecl
the need lhese warriors had for slrong leadership and
decisive action. Thus, lhey see lheir deities in every
bend of a river, hear them in lhe crash of lhe thunder
and lhe booming of lhe glaciers, and smell them in lhe
smoke of a burning longhouse.
The Norse pantheon includes two main families, the
Aesir (deilies of war and destiny) and lhe Vanir (gods
of ferlilily and prosperily). Once enemies, these lwo
families are now c10sely allied againsl lheir common
enemies, the gianls (including lhe gods Surlur and
Thrym). Like lhe gods of Greyhawk, gods in different
families somelimes
have overlap in their spheres of
influence: Frey (of lhe Vanir) and Odur (of the Aesir)
are both associated with lhe sun, for example.

DEITIES

Deity

Alignment

The Daghdha, god of wealher and crops
Arawn, god oflife and dealh
Belenus, god of sun, light, and warmth

Suggested Domains

Symbol

CG
NE

Nature, Trickery
Life, Death

Bubbling cauldron or shield

NG

Light
Life
Life

Black star on gray background
Solar disk and standing stones
Footbridge
Crossed oak and mistletoe branches

Nature
Knowledge, Life

Red sun-capped mountain peak
Giant mallet over sword

Briganlia, goddess of rivers and livestock
Diancecht, god of medicine and healing

NG

Dunatis, god of mountains and peaks
Goibhniu, god of smiths and healing

N
NG

Lugh, god of arts, travei, and commerce

CN

Manannan mac Lir, god of oceans and sea creatures

LN

Math Mathonwy, god of magic
Morrigan, goddess ofbattle

NE

Knowledge

CE

War
War

LG

Nuada, god of war and warriors
Oghma, god of speech and writing

NG

Silvanus, god of nature and forests

N

GREEK

N

Knowledge, Life
Nature, Tempest

Knowledge
Nature

Pair of long hands
Wave of white water on green
Staff
Two crossed spears
Silver hand on black background
Unfurled scroll
Summer oak tree

DEITlES

Deity

Alignment

Suggested Domains

Symbol

Zeus, god of the sky, ruler of the gods

N

Aphrodite, goddess of love and beauty
Apollo, god of light, music, and healing

CG
CG

Fist full of lightning bolts
Sea shell

Ares, god of war and strife
Artemis, goddess ofhunting and childbirth
Athena, goddess of wisdom and civilization

CE

Tempest
Light
Knowledge, Life, Light
War

NG

Life, Nature

Bow and arrow on lunar disk

LG

Owl

CN

Knowledge, War
Life
Life

Lyre
Spear

Demeter, goddess of agriculture
Dionysus, god of mirth and wine
Hades, god ofthe underworld

NG
LE

Death

Thyrsus (staff tipped with pine cone)
Black ram

Hecale, goddess of magic and the moon
Hephaestus, god of smithing and craft

CE

Knowledge, Trickery
Knowledge
Trickery
Tempest, War
Trickery
Life
War
Nature
Tempest
Trickery

Setting moon
Hammer and anvil
Fan of peacock feathers
Lion's head
Caduceus (winged staff and serpents)
Hearth
Winged woman
Syrinx (pan pipes)
Trident
Red pentagram

Hera, goddess of marriage and intrigue
Hercules, god of strength and adventure

NG

CN
CG

Hermes, god cf travei and commerce

CG

Hestia, goddess of home and family
Nike, goddess of victory
Pan, god of nature
Poseidon, god of the sea and earthquakes
Tyche, goddess of good fortune

NG

APPENDlX

B I GOuS

OFTHE

MULTIVERSE

LN

CN

CN
N

Mare's head

ECYPTlAN

DEITIEs

Deity

Alignment

Suggested

LG
LN

Life, Light
Death

NE

Trickery

Flaming snake

CG
CN

War
Tríckery
Life, Light

Cat
Image ofthe misshapen deíty
Horned cow's head with lunar disk

Re-Horakhty, god ofthe sun, ruler ofthe gods
Anubis, god of judgment and death
Apep, god of evil, fire, and serpents
Bast, goddess of cats and vengeance
Bes, god of luck and musíc
Hathor, goddess

NG

of love, music, and

motherhood
Imhotep, god of crafts and medicine
Isis, goddess of fertilíty and magíc
Nephthys, goddess of death and grief
Osiris, god of nature and the underworld
Ptah, god of crafts, knowledge, and secrets

NG
NG
CG
LG
LN

Domains

Symbol
Solar dísk encírcled
Black jackal

by serpent

Knowledge

Step pyramid

Knowledge, Life
Death
Life, Nature

Ankh and star
Horns around a lunar dísk
Crook and fiail

Knowledge

Buli

and desert storms

CE

Death, Tempest,
Trickery

Coiled cobra

Sobek, god of water and crocodiles
Thoth, god of knowledge and wisdom

LE
N

Nature, Tempest
Knowledge

Crocodile head with horns and plumes

Set, god of darkness

NORSE

Ibis

DEITIES

Deity

Alignment

Odin, god ofknowledge and war
Aegir, god of the sea and storms
Balder, god of beauty and poetry
Forsetí, god ofjustice and law
Frey, god of fertilíty and the sun
Freya, goddess of fertility and love
Frigga, goddess ofbirth and fertility
Heimdall, god of watchfulness and loyalty
Hei, goddess of the underworld
Hermod, god of luck
Loki, god of thíeves and trickery
Njord, god of sea and wind
Odur, god oflíght and the sun
Síf, goddess of war
Skadi, god of earth and mountains
Surtur, god of fire giants and war
Thor, god of storms and thunder
Thrym, god of fire giants and cold
Tyr, god of courage and strategy
Uller, god ofhunting and winter

NG
NE
NG
N
NG
NG
N
LG

Suggested

Domains

Knowledge, War
Tempest
Life, Light
Light
Life, Light
Life
Life, Light
Light, War

NE
CN
CE

Death
Trickery
Trickery

NG
CG

Nature, Tempest
Light

CG
N
LE

War
Nature
War

CG
CE
LN

Tempest, War
War
Knowledge, War

CN

Nature

Symbol
Watching blue eye
Rough ocean waves
Gem-encrusted
silver chalice
Head of a bearded man
Ice-blue greatsword
Falcon
Cat
Curling musical horn
Woman's face, rottíng on one side
Winged scroll
Flame
Gold coin
Solar disk
Upraísed sword
Mountain peak
Flaming sword
Hammer
White double-bladed
Sword
Longbow

axe

J

f

APPENOIX B I CO os OF THE MULTIVfRSE

299

c: THE PLANES OF EXISTENCE

ApPENDIX
NCREDlBLYVAST

lS THE COSMOS

OF THE

DUNGEONS& DRAGONSgame, which teems
with a multitude of worlds as weJl as myriad
alternate dimensions of reality, calIed the planes
of existence. lt encompasses every world
where Dungeon Masters run their adventures,
alI within the relatively mundane realm of the
Material Plane. Beyond lhat plane are domains
of raw elemental matter and energy, realms of pure
thought and ethos, the homes of demons and angels,
and the dominions of the gods.
Many spelIs and magic items can draw energy
from these planes, summon the creatures that dwelI
there, communicate with their denizens, and alIow
advenlurers to travei there. As your character achieves
greater power and higher leveIs, you might undertake
a quest to rescue a friend fram the horrific depths of
the Abyss, or find yourself hoisting a tankard with lhe
friendly giants of Ysgard. Vou might walk on streets
made of solid fire or lest your mettle on a battlefield
where lhe falIen are resurrected with each dawn.

r

THE MATERIAL

PLANE

The Material Plane is the nexus where the philosophical
and elemental forces tha! define the other planes colIide
in lhe jumbled existence of mortal life and mundane
matter. AlI the worlds of 0&0 exist within the Material
Plane, making it the starting point for most campaigns
and adventures. The rest of the multiverse is defined in
relation to the Material Plane.
The worlds of the Material Plane are infinitely diverse,
for lhey reflect the creative imagination of the DMs
who set their games there, as weJl as the players whose
heroes adventure there. They include magic-wasled
desert planets and island-dotted waler worlds, worlds
where magic combines with advanced technology and
others trapped in an endless Stone Age, worlds where
the gods walk and places they have abandoned.

POSITIVE

PLANE

OUTER PLANES

The best-known worlds in lhe multiverse are lhe
ones lha! have been published as official campaign
settings for the 0&0 game over the years-Greyhawk,
Blackmoor, Dragonlance, the Forgotten Realms,
Mystara, Birthright, Dark Sun, and Eberron, among
others. Each of these worlds boasts its own cast of
heroic adventurers and scheming villains, its own
ancient ruins and forgotten artifacts, its own dungeons
and its own dragons. But if your campaign takes place
on one of these worlds, it belongs to your DM-you
mighl imagine it as one of thousands of paralIel versions
of the world, which might diverge wildly from the
published version.

MATERIAL

ECHOES

The Material Plane is a richly magical place, and its
magical nalure is reflected in the two planes that share
its central place in the multiverse. The Feywild and the
ShadowfelI are paralIel dimensions occupying the same
cosmological space, so they are often calIed echo planes
or mirrar planes to the Material Plane. The worlds and
landscapes of these planes mirror lhe natural world
of the Material Plane but reflect those fealures into
different forms-more marvelous and magical in the
Feywild, distorted and colorless in the Shadowfell.
Where a volcano stands in the Malerial Plane, a
mountain topped with skyscraper-sized crystals that
glow with internai fire towers in lhe Feywild, and a
jagged rock outcrapping resembling a skuJl marks the
spot on the Shadowfell.
The Feywild, also calIed the Plane of Faerie, is a land
of soft lights and wonder, a country of little people with
great desires, a place of music and death. lt is a realm
of eternal twilight, with slow lanterns bobbing in the
gentle breeze and huge fireflies buzzing through graves
and fields. The sky is alight with the faded colors of
lhe setting, or perhaps rising, sun. But, in fact, the sun
neve r truly sets or rises; it remains stationary, dusky
and low in the sky. Away fram the settled areas ruled by
the Seelie Court, lhe land is a tangle of sharp-toothed
brambles and syrupy fens-perfect territory for the
Unseelie to hunt their prey. Fey creatures, such as those
brought to the world by conjure woad/and beings and
similar spelIs, dwelI in the Feywild.
The Shadowfell, also calIed the Plane af Shadaw, is
a darkly lighted dimension, a world af black and white
where colar has been leached fram everything. lt is a
place af taxic darkness that hates the light, where the
sky is a black vault with neither sun nor stars.

•••

POSITIVE

ANO

NEGATIVE

PLANES

••

Like a dome above the other planes, the Positive Plane is the
source of radianl energy and lhe raw life force lhal suffuses
allliving beings, from lhe puny lo lhe sublime, Ils dark
refleclion is lhe Negative Plane, lhe source of necrolic energy
lhal deslroys lhe Iiving and animales lhe undead .

----------------------- ..

....•

300

APPENDIX

C I THE

PLANES

OF EXISTENCE

BEYOND THE MATERIAL
Beyond the Material Plane. the various planes of
existence are realms of myth and mystery. They're
not simply other worlds. but different qualities of
being, formed and governed by spiritual and elemental
principIes abstracted fram the ordinary world.

PLANAR TRAVEL
When adventurers travei into other planes of existence,
they are undertaking a legendary journey acrass the
thresholds of existence to a mythic destination where
they strive to complete their quest. Such a journey is the
stuff of legend. Braving the realms of the dead. seeking
out the celestial servants of a deity. or bargaining with
an efreeti in its home city will be the subject of song and
story for years to come.
TraveI to the planes beyond the Material Plane can be
accomplished in two ways: by casting a spell or by using
a planar portal.
SpeJls. A number of spells allow direct or indirect
access to other planes of existence. Plane shift and
gate can transport adventurers directly to any other
plane of existence. with different degrees of precision.
Etherealness allows adventurers to enter the Ethereal
Plane and traveI fram there to any of the planes it
touches-the Shadowfell. the Feywild. or the Elemental
Planes. And the astral projection spelllets adventurers
praject themselves into the Astral Plane and traveI to
the Outer Planes.
Porta/s. A portal is a general term for a stationary
interplanar connection that links a specific location
on one plane to a specific location on another. Some
portaIs are like doorways, a clear window, or a fogshrauded passage, and simply stepping through it
effects the interplanar traveI. Others are locationscircles of standing stones, soaring towers. sailing ships,
or even whole towns-that exist in multiple planes at
once or flicker from one plane to another in turno Some
are vortices, typically joining an Elemental Plane with a
very similar location on the Material Plane. such as the
heart of a voleano (leading to the Plane of Fire) or the
depths of the ocean (to the Plane of Water).

TRANSITIVE

PLANES

The Ethereal Plane and the Astral Plane are called the
Transitive Planes. They are mostly featureless realms
that serve primarily as ways to traveI from one plane
to another. Spells such as etherealness and astral
projection allow characters to enter these planes and
traverse them to reach the planes beyond.
The Ethereal Plane is a misty, fog-bound dimension
that is sometimes described as a great oceano Its shores,
called the Border Ethereal. overlap the Material Plane
and the lnner Planes, so that every location on those
planes has a corresponding location on the Ethereal
Plane. Certain creatures can see into the Border
Ethereal. and the see invisibility and true seeing spell
grunt that ability. Some magical effects also extend fram
the Material Plane into the Border Ethereal. particularly
effects that use force energy such as forcecage and wall

of force. The depths of the plane, the Deep Ethereal, are
a region of swirling mists and colorful fogs.
The Astral Plane is the realm of thought and dream.
where visitors traveI as disembodied souls to reach
the planes of the divine and demonic. It is a great,
silvery sea. the same above and below, with swirling
wisps of white and gray streaking among motes of light
resembling distant stars. Erratic whirlpools of color
flicker in midair like spinning coins. Occasional bits of
solid matter can be found here, but most of the Astral
Plane is an endless. open domain.

INNER PLANES
The Inner Planes surround and enfold the Material
Plane and its echoes, providing the raw elemental
substance from which ali the worlds were made. The
four Elemental Planes-Ai r, Earth. Fire, and Waterform a ring araund the Material Plane. suspended
within the churning Elemental Chaos.
At their innermost edges. where they are closest
to the Material Plane (in a conceptual if not a literal
geographical sense). the four Elemental Planes
resemble a world in the Material Plane. The four
elements mingle together as they do in the Material
Plane. forming land. sea. and sky. Farther from the
Material Plane. though, the Elemental Planes are both
alien and hostile. Here, the elements exist in their
purest form-great expanses of solid earth. blazing fire.
crystal-clear water, and unsullied air. These regions
are little-known. so when discussing the Plane of Fire.
for example, a speaker usually means just the border
region. At the farthest extents of the Inner Planes,
the pure elements dissolve and bleed together into an
unending tumult of clashing energies and colliding
substance, the Elemental Chaos.

OUTER PLANES
If the Inner Planes are the raw matter and energy that
makes up the multiverse, the Outer Planes are the
direction. thought and purpose for such construction.
Accordingly. many sages refer to the Outer Planes as
divine planes, spiritual planes. or godly planes, for the
Outer Planes are best known as the homes of deities.
When discussing anything to do with deities, the
language used must be highly metaphorical. Their
actual homes are not literally "places" at ali, but
exemplify the idea that the Outer Planes are realms of
thought and spirit. As with the Elemental Planes, one
can imagine the perceptible part of the Outer Planes as
a sort of border region, while extensive spiritual regions
lie beyond ordinary sensory experience.
Even in those perceptible regions, appearances
can be deceptive. Initially. many of the Outer Planes
appear hospitable and familiar to natives of the
Material Plane. But the landscape can change at the
whims of the powerful forces that live on the Outer
Planes. The desires of the mighty forces that dwell on
these planes can remake them completely, effectively
erasing and rebuilding existence itself to bettcr fulfill
their own needs.

APPENDlx

C I THE

PL~NES

Df

FXISTENCE

3°1

Distance is a virtually meaningless concept on the
Outer Planes. The perceptible regions of the planes
often seem quite small, but they can also stretch on to
what seems like infinity. It might be possible to take
a guided tour of the Nine Hells, from the first layer to
the ninth, in a single day-if the powers of the Hells
desire il. Or it could take weeks for travelers to make a
grueling trek across a single layer.
The most well-known Outer Planes are a group of
sixteen planes that correspond to the eight alignments
(excluding neutrality) and the shades of distinction
between them.
OUTER

PLANES

Outer Plane

Alignment

Mount Celestia, the Seven Heavens of

LG

Bytopia, the Twin Paradises of
Elysium, the Blessed Fields of
The Beastlands, the Wilderness

NG, LG

NG
of

NG,CG

Arborea, the Olympian Glades of
Ysgard, the Heroie Domains of

CG

Limbo, the Ever-Changing Chaos of
Pandemonium,
the Windswept Depths of
The Abyss, the Innnite Layers of

CN

DEMIPLANES

CN,CE

Demiplanes are small extradimensional spaces with
their own unique rules. They are pieces of reality that
don't se em to fit anywhere else. Demiplanes come
into being by a variety of means. Some are created by
spells, such as demiplane, or generated at the desire of a
powerful deity or other force. They may exist naturally,
as a fold of existing reality that has been pinched olf
from the rest of the multiverse, or as a baby universe
growing in power. A given demiplane can be entered
through a single point where it touches another plane.
Theoretically, a plane shift spell can also carry travelers
to a demiplane, but the proper frequency required
for the tuning fork is extremely hard to acquire. The
gate spell is more reliable, assuming the caster knows
of the demiplane.

Careeri, the Tarterian Depths of
Hades, the Gray Waste of
Gehenna, the Bleak Eternity of

CN,CG

CE
NE, CE
NE
NE, LE

The Nine Hells (of Baator)
Aeheron, the Innnite Battleneld of
Meehanus, the Cloekwork Nirvana of

LE

Areadia, the Peaeeable

LN, LG

Kingdoms of

LN, LE
LN

The planes with some element of good in their nature
are called the Upper Planes. Celestial creatures such
as angels and pegasi dwell in the Upper Planes. Planes
with some element of evil are the Lower Planes. Fiends
such as demons, devils, and yugoloths dwell in the
Lower Planes. A plane's alignment is its essence, and
a character whose alignment doesn't match the plane's
experiences a profound sense of dissonance there.
When a good creature visits Elysium, for example, it
feels in tune with the plane, but an evil creature feels
out of tune and more than a little uncomfortable.
OTHER PLANES
Existing somehow between or beyond the known planes
of existence are a variety of other realms.
SIGIL AND THE OUTLANDS

The Outlands is the plane between the Outer Planes, a
plane of neutrality, but not the neutrality of nothingness.
Instead it incorporates a little of everything, keeping it
ali in a paradoxical balance-simultaneously concordant
and in opposition. It is a broad region of varied terrain,
with open prairies, towering mountains, and twisting,
shallow rivers, strongly resembling an ordinary world
of the Material Plane.
The Outlands is circular, like a great wheel-in fact,
Ihose who envlsion the Ouler Planes as a wheel point
to the Outlands as proof, calling il a microcosm of the

302

planes. That argument might be circular, however,
for it is possible that the arrangement of the Outlands
inspired the idea of the Great Wheel in the first place.
Around the outside edge of the circle, evenly spaced,
are the gate-towns: sixleen settlements, each built
around a portal leading to one of the Outer Planes. Each
town shares many of the characteristics of the plane
where its gate leads.
At the center of the Outlands, like the axle of the
planar wheel, the Spire shoots impossibly high into the
sky. Above this thin peak floats the ring-shaped city of
Sigil, the City of Doors. This bustling planar metropolis
holds countless portais to other planes and worlds.
Sigil is a trader's city. Goods, merchandise, and
information come to it from across the planes. There
is a brisk trade in information about the planes, in
particular in the command words or items required for
the operation of particular portais. These portal keys
are highly sought after, and many travelers within the
city are looking for a particular portal or a portal key
to allow them to continue on their way.

APPENDIX

C I THE

PLANES

OF EXISTENCE

THE FAR REALM

The Far Realm is beyond the known muItiverse. In fact,
it might be an entirely separate multiverse with its own
physical and magical laws. Where stray energies from
the Far Realm leak onto another plane, life and matter
are warped and twisted into alien shapes that defy
ordinary geometry and biology.
The entities that abide in the Far Realm are toa alien
for a normal mind to accept without damage. Titanic
creatures swim through nothingness, preoccupied
with madness. Unspeakable things whisper awful
truths to those who dare listen. For mortais, knowledge
of the Far Realm Is a triumph of mind over the rude
boundaries of matter, space, and eventually sanity.
There are no known portaIs lo the Far Realm, or
at least none that are still viable. Ancient elves once
pierced the boundary of eons with a vast portal to the
Far Realm within a mountain called Firestorm Peak,
but their civilization imploded in bloody terror and
the portaI's location-even its home world-is longforgotten. Other portaIs might still exist, marked by the
alien forces leaking through to corrupt the Material
Plane around them.

pOSITIVE PLANE

APPENDIX

C

THE

PL\NES

OF EXISTENCE

'103

D: CREATURE

ApPENDIX

PELLS AND CLASS FEATURES

ALLOW

CHARACTERS

to transform into animaIs, summon creatures
to serve as familiars, and create undead.
Statistics for such creatures are grouped
in this appendix for your convenience. For
information on how to read a stat block, see
the Monster Manual.

STATISTICS
BOAR
Medium beasl, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 ft.
STR
13 (+1)

DEX
11 (+0)

CON
12 (+1)

INT
2 (-4)

WIS
9 (-1)

CHA
5 (-3)

BAT
Tiny beasl, unaligned

Senses passive Perception
Languages Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

Armar Class 12
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 5 ft., fly 30 ft.
STR
2 (-4)

DEX
15 (+2)

CON
8 (-1)

INT
2 (-4)

Senses blindsight 60 ft., passive Perception
LanguagesChallenge 0(10 XP)
Echolocation.

WIS
12 (+1)

CHA
4 (-3)

11

9

Charge. If the boar moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
creature right before hitting it with a tusk attack, the target
takes an extra 3 (1d6) slashing damage and must succeed on a
De 11 5trength saving throw or be knocked prone.
Relentless (Recharges after the Boar Finishes a Short ar Long
Rest). If the boar takes damage that reduces it to O hit points,
unless the damage is 7 or more or from a criticai hit, it drops to
1 hit point instead.

While it can't hear, the bat has no blindsight.
ACTlONS

Keen Heoring. The bat has advantage
checks that rely on hearing.

on Wisdom

(Perception)

Tusk. Melee Weopon Atlack: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) slashing damage.

ACTlONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.

Medium beasl, unaligned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 19 (3d8 + 6)
Speed 40 ft., climb 30 ft.
DEX
10 (+0)

Large beasl, una/igned
Armor Class 11 (natural armor)
Hit Points 34 (4d10 + 12)
Speed 40 ft., c1imb 30 ft.

BLACKBEAR

STR
15 (+2)

BROWNBEAR

CON
14 (+2)

Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception
Languages Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)

STR
19 (+4)

INT
2 (-4)

WIS
12 (+1)

CHA
7 (-2)

DEX
10 (+0)

CON
16 (+3)

Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception
Languages Challenge 1 (200 XP)

INT
2 (-4)

WIS
13 (+1)

CHA
7 (-2)

13

13
Keen Smell. The bear has advantage
checks that rely on smel!.

on Wisdom

(Perception)

ACTIONS
Keen Smell. The bear has advantage
checks that rely on smel!.

on Wisdom

(Perception)

ACTIONS
Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks, one with its bite and
one with its c1aws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
H/t: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Atlaek: +3 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) slashing damage.

APPENDIX

3°4

o I CREATURE

STATISTICS

Multiattack. The bear makes two attacks, one with its bite and
one with its c1aws.
Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
H/t: 8 (ld8 + 4) piercing damage.
Claws. Melee Weapon Attock: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) slashing damage.

CAT

ACTIONS

Tiny beast, unaligned

Bite. Melee Weopan Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one targel.
Hit: 7 (ldl0 + 2) piercing damage, and the target is grappled.
Until this grapple ends, the target is restrained, and the
crocodile can't bite another targel.

Armor Class 12
Hit Points 2 (ld4)
Speed 40 ft., c1imb 30 fI.
STR
3 (-4)

DEX
15 (+2)

CON
10 (+0)

INT
3 (-4)

WIS
12 (+1)

CHA
7 (-2)

Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Challenge O (10 XP)
Keen Smell. The cat has advantage
checks that rely on smel!.

Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 14 (natural armor)
Hit Points 37 (5dl0 + 10)
Speed 50 fI.

on Wisdom

(Perception)

ACTIONS
Claws. Melee Weapan Attaek: +0 to hit. reach 5 ft., one targel.
Hit: 1 slashing damage.

CONSTRICTOR

DIREWOLF

STR
17 (+3)

DEX
15 (+2)

CON
15 (+2)

INT
3 (-4)

WIS
12 (+1)

CHA
7 (-2)

Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Challenge 1 (200 XP)

Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advantage on Wisdom
(Perception) checks that rely on hearing or smel!.

SNAKE

Large beast, unaligned
Paek Taeti,s. The wolf has advantage on atlack rolls against a
creature if at least one of the wolf's allies is within 5 feet of the
creature and isn't incapacitated.

Armor Class 12
Hit Points 13 (2dl0 + 2)
Speed 30 ft., swim 30 ft.
STR
15 (+2)

DEX
14 (+2)

ACTIONS

CON
12 (+1)

INT
1 (-5)

Senses blindsight 10 fI.. passive Perception
Languages Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

WIS
10 (+0)

CHA
3 (-4)

10

Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 to hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) piercing damage. Ifthe target is a creature,
it must succeed on a De 13 Strength saving throw or be
knocked prone.

FROG
Tiny beast, unaligned
ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one creature.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Constriet. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
creature. Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) bludgeoning damage, and the target
is grappled. Until this grapple ends, the creature is restrained,
and the snake can't constrict another target.

Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 19 (3dl0 + 3)
Speed 20 ft., swim 30 fI.

DEX
10 (+0)

STR
1 (-5)

DEX
13 (+1)

CON
8 (-1)

INT
1 (-5)

WIS
8 (-1)

Skills Perception +1, Stealth +3
Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception
Languages Challenge O (O XP)

CROCODILE

STR
15 (+2)

Armor Class 11
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 20 fI., swim 20 ft.

CON
13 (+1)

Skills Stealth +2
Senses passive Perception
Languages Ch~lIenge 1/2 (100 XP)

Amphibious.

INT
2 (-4)

WIS
10 (+0)

CHA
5 (-3)

CHA
3 (-4)

11

The frog can breathe air and water.

Standing Leap. As part ofits movement and without a running
start, the frog can long jump up to 10 feet and high jump
up to 5 feel.

10

Hold Breath. The crocodile can hold its breath for 15 minutes.

APPENDIX

o

CRE \TURE

STATISTICS

305

Web (Recharge

GIANTEAGLE

5-6).

Ranged Weapon Alloek: +5 lo hil, range

30 fl./60 fI., one crealure.

Large beast, neutral good

webbing.

H/I: The largel is reslrained

As an aclion, lhe reslrained

by

largel can make a DC

12 51renglh check, bursling lhe webbing on a success. lhe
webbing can also be allacked and deslroyed (AC 10; hp 5;

Armar Class 13
Hil Poinls 26 (4dl0 + 4)
Speed 10 fI., Ay 80 fI.

vulnerabilily

lo fire damage;

immunily

lo bludgeoning,

paison,

and psychic damage).
SIR

16 (+3)

DEX
17 (+3)

CON

INI

13 (+1)

8 (-1)

WIS
14 (+2)

HAWK (FALCON)
Tiny beasl, unaJigned

Skills Perceplion +4
Senses passive Perceplion
14
Languages Gianl Eagle, underslands
speak il
Challenge 1 (200 XP)

Common

Keen Sight. lhe eagle has advanlage

on Wisdom

checks

CHA

10 {+O}

Armar Class 13
Hil Poinls 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 10 fI., Ay 60 fI.

bul doesn'l

(Perceplion)

SIR

DEX

CON

INT

WIS

CHA

5 (-3)

16 (+3)

8 (-1)

2 (-4)

14 (+2)

6 (-2)

Ihal rely on sighl.
Skills Perceplion +4
Senses passive Perceplion
Languages Challenge O (10 XP)

ACIIONS

Mu/tiattack.

lhe

eagle makes

Iwo allacks,

one wilh ils beak

and one wilh ils lalons.

Beak. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
H/t: 6 (ld6 + 3) piercing damage.

14

Keen Sight. lhe hawk has advanlage
checks Ihal rely on sighl.

on Wisdom

(Perceplion)

Talons. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.

Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) slashing

ACTIONS

damage.

Talons. Melee Weopon Altaek: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 1 slashing damage.

GIANT SPIDER
Large beast, unaJigned

IMP

Armar Class 14 (nalural armar)
Hil Poinls 26 (4dl0 + 4)
Speed 30 fI., c1imb 30 fI.
SIR
14 (+2)

DEX
16 (+3)

Tiny fiend (devi/, shapechanger),

CON
12 (+1)

Skills Sleallh +7
Senses blindsighll0
fI., darkvision
Languages Challenge 1 (200 XP)

INI

WIS

CHA

2 (-4)

11 (+O)

4 (-3)

Perceplion

Spider Climb. lhe spider can c1imb diflicull surfaces,
upside

down on ceilings,

wilhoul

Armar Class 13
Hil Poinls 10 (3d4 + 3)
Speed 20 fI., Ay 40 ft. (20 fI. in ral form; 20 fI., Ay 60 fI. in raven
form; 20 fI., c1imb 20 fI. in spider form)
STR

60 fI., passive

needing

10

including

lo make an

abilily check.

Web Sense. While in conlacl wilh a web, lhe spider knows lhe
exacllocalion

of any olher crealure

Web Walker. lhe spider ignores

in conlacl
movemenl

wilh lhe same web.
reslriclions

6 (-2)

DEX
17 (+3)

CON
13 (+1)

WIS

12 (+1)

CHA
14 (+2)

Skills Deceplion +4, Insighl +3, Persuasion
+4, Sleallh +5
Damage Resislances
cold; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing
from nonmagical weapons Ihal aren'l silvered
Damage Immunilies fire, poison
Condilion Immunilies
poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 fI., passive Perceplion
11
Languages Infernal, Common
Challenge 1 (200 XP)

Shapechanger.
lhe imp can use ils aclion lo polymorph
inlo
lhe beasl form of a ral, a raven, ar a spider, ar inlo ils devil
formo 115slalislics are lhe same in each form, allhough ils

ACTIONS

Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one crealure.
H/t: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage, and lhe largel must make a

allack

De 11 Conslilulion
saving lhrow, laking 9 (2d8) poison damage
on a failed save, ar half as much damage on a successful one. If
lhe poison damage reduces lhe largel lo O hil poinls, lhe largel
is slable bul poisoned for 1 hour, and paralyzed while poisoned
in lhis way.

Devil's Sight. Magical darkness

APPENDIX

INI

11 {+O}

caused

by webbing.

306

lawful evil

D I CREATURE

STATISTlCS

is dilferenl

nollransformed.

in some of Ihem. Any equipmenl
If slain, lhe imp reverls
doesn'l

il carries

lo ils devil formo
impede

lhe

imp's darkvision.

Magic Resistance.
againsl

lhe imp has advanlage
spells and olher magical elfecls.

on saving lhrows

is

ACTIONS
Sting (Bite in Beast Form). Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 to hit,
reach 5 ft., one creature. Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage, and
the target must make on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw,
taking lO (3d6) poison damage on a failed save, or half as
much damage on a successful one.
Invisibility. lhe imp tums invisible until it attacks or until its
concentration ends. Anything the invisible imp is carrying or
wearing is invisible as long as it remains in contact with the imp.

LION

Pounce. If the lion moves at least 20 feet straight toward a
target right before hitting it with a c1aw attack, the target must
succeed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or be knocked
prone. If lhe largel is prone, the lion can lake a bonus aclion lo
make one bite attack against it.
Running Leal'. As parI of ils movement and after a 10-foot
running slart, the lion can long jump up to 25 feet.
ACTlONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hit, reach 5 ft., one target.
Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) piercing damage.

Large beast, unaligned

Claw. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hit, reach 5 ft., one larget.
Hit: 6 (ld6 + 3) slashing damage.

Armar Class 12
Hit Points 26 (4dl0 + 4)
Speed 50 ft.

MASTIFF

STR
17 (+3)

DEX
15 (+2)

Medium beast, unaligned

CON

INT

13 (+1)

3 (-3)

WIS
12 (+1)

CHA
8 (-1)

Skills Perception +3, Stealth +6
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Challenge 1 (200 XP)
Keen Smell. lhe lion has advantage
checks that rely on smell.

on Wisdom

(Perception)

Pack Tacties. The lion has advantage on attack rolls against a
creature if at least one of the lion's allies is within 5 feet of the
creature and isn't incapacitated.

Armor elass 12
Hit Points 5 (ld8 + 1)
Speed 40 ft.

STR

DEX

13 (+1)

14 (+2)

eON
12 (+1)

Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception
Languages ehallenge 1/8 (25 XP)

INT

3 (-4)

WIS
12 (+1)

eHA
7 (-2)

13

Keen Hearing and Smell. The masliffhas advantage on
Wisdom (Perception) checks thal rely on hearing or smel!.
ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +3 lo hit, reach 5 fI., one target. Hit:
4 (ld6 + 1) piercing damage. Ifthe larget is a creature, it must
succeed on a DC 11 Slrength saving throw or be knocked prone.

MULE
Medium beast, unoligned
Armar elass 10
Hit Poinls 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 ft.
STR
14 (+2)

DEX
10 (+0)

eON
13 (+1)

Senses passive Perception
Languages ehallenge 1/8 (25 XP)

INT

2 (-4)

WIS
10 (+0)

eHA
5 (-3)

lO

Beast ofBurden. lhe mule is considered to be a Large animal
for the purpose of determining its carrying capacily.
Sure.Footed. Whenever the mule would be knocked prone, il
stays on ils feel ifil succeeds on a DC 10 Dexterily saving Ihrow.
ACTIONS
Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +2 to hit, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) bludgeoning damage.

307

OWL

POISONOUS

Tiny beast, unaligned

Tiny beast, unaligned

Armor Class 11
Hil Poinls 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 5 fI., fly 60 fI.

Armor Class 13
Hil Poinls 2 (ld4)
Speed 30 fI., swim 30 fI.

STR
3 (-4)

DEX
13 (+1)

CON
8 (-1)

INT
2 (-4)

WIS
12 (+1)

CHA
7 (-2)

STR
2 (-4)

DEX
16 (+3)

SNAKE

CON
11 (+0)

INI
1 (-5)

WIS
10 (+0)

CHA
3 (-4)

Senses blindsighl10 fI., passive Perceplion 10
Languages Challenge 1/8 (25 XP)

Skills Perceplion +3, 51eallh +3
Senses darkvision 120 fI., passive Perceplion 13
Languages Challenge O (lO XP)

ACTIONS
F/yby. lhe owl provokes no opporlunily allacks when il flies
oul of an enemy's reach.
Keen Sight. lhe owl has advanlage on Wisdom (Perceplion)
checks Ihal rely on sighl.

Bile. Melee Weapon Attaek: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 1 piercing damage, and lhe largel musl make a DC 10
Conslilulion saving Ihrow, laking 5 (2d4) poison damage on a
failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.

ACTIONS
Talons. Melee Weapon Attaek: +3 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 1 slashing damage.

Medium beast, unaligned

STR
6 (-2)

Armor Class 12
Hil Poinls 13 (3d8)
Speed 50 fI., c1imb 40 fI.

14 (+2)

DEX
15 (+2)

CON
10 (+0)

INT
3 (-4)

WIS
14 (+2)

CHA
7 (-2)

Skills Perceplion +4, 51eallh +6
Senses passive Percepllon 14
LanguagesChallenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Keen Smefl. lhe panlher has advanlage on Wisdom
(Perceplion) checks Ihal rely on smell.
Pounee. If lhe panlher moves alleasl 20 feel slraighlloward
a crealure righl before hilling il wilh a c1aw allack, lhe largel
musl succeed on a DC 12 51renglh saving Ihrow or be knocked
prone. Iflhe largel is prone, lhe panlher can lake a bonus
aclion lo make one bile allack againsl il.
ACTlONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 5 (ld6 + 2) piercing damage.
Claw. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) slashing damage.

308

APPENDlX

Tiny dragon, neutral good
Armor Class 13 (nalural armor)
Hil Poinls 7 (2d4 + 2)
Speed 15 fI., fly 60 ft.

PANTHER

SIR

PSEUDODRAGON

D I CREATURE

STATISTlCS

DEX
15 (+2)

CON
13 (+1)

INI
10 (+0)

WIS
12 (+1)

CHA
10 (+0)

Skills Perceplion +3, 51eallh +4
Senses blindsighl10 fI., darkvision 60 fI., passive Perceplion 13
Languages underslands Common and Draconic bul doesn'l
speak
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)
Keen Senses. lhe pseudodragon has advanlage on Wisdom
(Perceplion) checks Ihal rely on sighl, hearing, or smell.
Magie Resistanee. lhe pseudodragon has advanlage on saving
Ihrows againsl spells and olher magical effecls.
Limited Te/epathy. lhe pseudodragon can communicale
sim pie ideas, emolions, and images lelepalhically wilh any
crealure wilhin 100 feel ofillhal can undersland a language.
ACTIONS
Bite. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 lo hil, reach 5 ft., one largel.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage.
Sting. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one crealure.
Hit: 4 (ld4 + 2) piercing damage, and lhe largel musl succeed
on a DC 11 Conslilulion saving Ihrow or become poisoned for
1 hour. If ils saving Ihrow resull is 6 or lower, lhe largel falls
unconscious for lhe same duralion, or unlil illakes damage or
another creature uses an action to wake it.

~UASIT

ACllONS

. .

Tiny fiend (demon, shapechanger),

chaotlC evll

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +0 to hit, reach 5 ft., one targel.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.

Armar Class 13
Hil Poinls 7 (3d4)
Speed 40 fI. (10 fI., fly 40 fI. in bal form; 40 fI., c1imb 40 fI. in
cenlipede form; 40 fI., swim 40 fI. in load form)
SlR
5 (-3)

DEX
17 (+3)

CON
10 (+0)

INl
7 (-2)

WIS
10 (+0)

CHA
10 (+0)

Skills Sleallh +5
Damage Resislances cold, fire, lighlning; bludgeoning,
piercing, and slashing from nonmagical weapons
Damage Immunilies poison
Condilion Immunilies poisoned
Senses darkvision 120 fI., passive Perceplion 10
Languages Abyssal, Common
Chalienge 1 (200 XP)

RAVEN
Tiny beast, unaligned
Armor Class 12
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 10 ft., fly 50 fI.
STR
2 (-4)

DEX
14 (+2)

CON
8 (-1)

INT
2 (-4)

WIS
12 (+1)

CHA
6 (-2)

Skills Perception +3
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Chalienge O (10 XP)

Shapechanger.
lhe quasil can use ils aclion lo polymorph inlo
lhe beasl form of a bal, cenlipede, or load, or into its demon
formo Its statistics are lhe same in each form, although its
altack is different in some oflhem. Any equipment it carries is
not transformed. If slain, the quasit reverts lo its demon formo
Magic Resislance. lhe quasit has advanlage on saving Ihrows
againsl spells and other magical effects.

Mimicry. The raven can mimic simple sounds it has heard,
such as a person whispering, a baby crying, or an animal
chittering. A creature that hears the sounds can tell they are
imitations with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Insight) check.
ACTIONS
Beak. Me/ee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one targel.
Hit: 1 piercing damage.

ACllONS
Claws (Bite in Beast Form). Melee Weapon Attack: +4 lo hit,
reach 5 ft., one target. Hit: 5 (ld4 + 3) piercing damage. Ifthe
target is a creature, it musl succeed on a DC 10 Constitulion
saving throw or take 5 (2d4) poison damage and become
poisoned for 1 minute. lhe crealure can repeat the saving
throw at the end of each of its tums, ending the effect early
on a success.
Scare (ljDay). One creature ofthe quasit's choice within 20
feet ofit must succeed on a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw or be
frightened for 1 minute. lhe target can repeat the saving throw
at the end of each of its tums, with disadvantage if the quasit is
within line of sight, ending the effect early on a success.
Invisibility. lhe quasit tums invisible until it altacks or uses
Scare, or until its concentration ends. Anything the invisible
quasit is carrying or wearing is invisible as long as it remains in
contact with the quasit.

RAT

REEF SHARK
Medium beost, unaligned
Armor Class 12 (natural armor)
Hit Points 22 (4d8 + 4)
Speed O fI., swim 40 ft.
STR
14 (+2)

DEX
13 (+1)

CON
13 (+1)

INl
1 (-5)

CHA
4 (-3)

WIS
10 (+0)

Skills Perception +2
Senses blindsight 30 fI., passive Perception 12
Languages Challenge 1{2 (100 XP)
Pack Tacties. The shark has advantage on altack rolls against a
creature if at least one of the shark's allies is within 5 feet of the
creature and isn't incapacitated.
Water Breathing.

1

lhe shark can breathe only while u derwater.

Tiny beast, unaligned
ACTIONS
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 1 (ld4 - 1)
Speed 20 fI.
STR
2 (-4)

DEX
11 (+0)

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one arget.
Hit: 6 (ld8 + 2) piercing damage.
CON
9 (-1)

INT
2 (-4)

WIS
10 (+0)

CHA
4 (-3)

Senses darkvision 30 ft., passive Perception 10
Languages Challenge O (10 XP)
Keen Smell. The rat has advantage on Wisdom (Perception)
checks that rely on smell.

I
APPENDTX

D

CRFA1 URE fATISTICS

309

RIDING HORSE
Large beast, unaligned
Armor Class 10
Hit Points 13 (2d10 + 2)
Speed GOfI.
STR
1G (+3)

OEX
10 (+0)

CON
12 (+1)

Senses passive Perception
Languages Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

INT
2 (-4)

WIS
11 (+0)

CHA
7 (-2)

10

ACTIONS
Hooves, Melee Weapon Attaek: +2 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one target.
Hit: 8 (2d4 + 3) bludgeoning damage.

SKELETON
Medium undead, lawful evil
Armor Class 13 (armor scraps)
Hit Points 13 (2d8 + 4)
Speed 30 fI.
STR
10 (+0)

OEX
14 (+2)

CON
15 (+2)

INT
G (-2)

WIS
8 (-1)

CHA
5 (-3)

Oamage Vulnerabilities bludgeoning
Oamage Immunities poison
Condition Immunities poisoned
Senses darkvision GOft., passive Perception 9
Languages understands languages it knew in life but can't speak
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

ACTIONS
Shortsword. Melee Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
targel. Hit: 5 (ldG + 2) piercing damage.
Shortbow. Ranged Weapon Attaek: +4 to hit, range 80 fl./320
ft., one targel. Hit: 5 (ldG + 2) piercing damage.

SPRITE
Tiny fey, neulral good

OEX
18 (+4)

CON
10 (+0)

••
INT
14 (+2)

WIS
13 (+1)

CHA
11 (+O)

Skills Perception +3, Stealth +8 (the check is made with
disadvantage if the sprite is flying)
Senses passive Perception 13
Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

ACTIONS
Longsword, Melee Weapon Atlaek: +2 to hit, reach 5 ft., one
largel. Hit: 1 slashing damage.

APPENDIX

D I CREATURE

Heart Sight. The sprite louches a crealure and knows lhe
creature's current emotional state. If the target fails a DC 10
Charisma saving lhrow, the sprite also knows the creature's
alignment. Celestiais, fiends, and undead automatically fail the
saving throw.
Invisibility, The sprite turns invisible until it attacks or casts
a spell, ar until its concentration ends. Anything the invisible
sprite is carrying ar wearing is invisible as long as it remains in
contact with the sprite.

Armor Class 15 (Ieather armor)
Hit Points 2 (ld4)
Speed 10 fI., fly 40 ft.
STR
3 (-4)

Shortbow, Ranged Weapon Attaek: +G to hit, range 40 ft.flGO
fI., one targel. Hit: 1 piercing damage. If the target is a
creature, it must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving
throw or beco me poisoned for 1 minute. Ifits saving lhrow
result is 5 ar lower, the target falls unconscious for the same
duration, or until it takes damage ar another creature uses an
action to wake it.

STATlSTICS

VARIANT:

WARHORSE

••

ARMOR

An armored warhorse has an Armar Class based on the
type of barding worn (se e chapter 5 for more information
on barding). Its Armar Class includes the horse's Dexterity
modifier, where applicable.

••

AC
12
13
14
15

Barding
Leather
Studded leather
Ring mail
Scale mail

AC
1G
17
18

Barding
Chain mail
Splint
Plate

••

TIGER

WOLF

Large beast, una/igned

Medium beast, una/igned

Armor Class 12
Hil Poinls 37 (5d10 + 10)
Speed 40 fI.

Armor Class 13 (nalural armar)
Hil Poinls 11 (2d8 + 2)
Speed 40 fI.

STR
17 (+3)

OEX
15 (+2)

CON
14 (+2)

INT
3 (-4)

WIS
12 (+1)

CHA
8 (-1)

I

--ST-R---O-E-X--C-O-N---IN-T---W-IS--~
_12.(.+1.)_.15.(.+2.)_.12.(.+1.) __ 3_(-_4_)
_1_2_(+_1_)
_~

I

Skills Perceplion +3, Sleallh +6
Senses passive Perceplion 13
Languages Challenge 1 (200 XP)

Skills Perceplion +3, Sleallh +4
Senses passive Perceplion 13
Languages Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

Keen Smell. The liger has advanlage on Wisdom (Perceplion)
checks lhal rely on smel!.

Keen Hearing and Smell. The wolf has advanlage on
(Perceplion) checks lhal rely on hearing or smel!.

Pounce. If lhe liger moves alleasl 20 feel slraighlloward a
crealure righl before hilling il wilh a c1aw allack, lhe largel
musl succeed on a DC 13 Slrenglh saving Ihrow or be knocked
prone. If lhe largel is prone, lhe liger can lake a bonus aclion
lo make one bile allack againsl il.

Pack Tactics. The wolf has advanlage on allack rolls a~ainsl a
crealure if alleasl one of lhe wolf's allies is wilhin 5 fe Iof lhe
crealure and isn'l incapacilaled.

isdom

I

ACTlONS

Bile. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 8 (ld10 + 3) piercing damage.

Bite. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 lO hil, reach 5 ft., one I rgel.
Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) piercing damage. Iflhe largel is a crea ure,
il musl succeed on a DC 11 Slrenglh saving lhrow or lle
knocked prone.

Claw. Melee Weapon Attack: +5 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 7 (ld8 + 3) slashing damage.

ZOMBIE

ACTIONS

Medium undead, neutral evil

WARHORSE

Armor Class 8
Hil Poinls 22 (3d8 + 9)
Speed 20 fI.

Large beast, unaligned
Armar Class 11
Hil Poinls 19 (3d10 + 3)
Speed 60 fI.
STR
18 (+4)

OEX
12 (+1)

CON
13 (+1)

STR
13 (+1)
INT

2 (-4)

WIS
12 (+1)

CHA
7 (-2)

Senses passive Perceplion 11
Languages Challenge 1/2 (100 XP)

OEX
6 (-2)

CON
16 (+3)

INT
3 (-4)

WIS
6 (-2)

CHA
5 (-3)

Saving Throws Wis +0
Oamage Immunilies poison
Condilion Immunilies poisoned
Senses darkvision 60 fI., passive Perceplion 8
Languages underslands lhe languages il knew in life uI can'l
speak
Challenge 1/4 (50 XP)

Trampling Charge. If lhe horse moves alleasl 20 feel slraighl
loward a crealure righl before hilling il wilh a hooves allack,
lhe largel musl succeed on a DC 14 Slrenglh saving Ihrow ar
be knocked prone. If lhe largel is prone, lhe horse can lake a
bonus aclion lo make anolher allack wilh ils hooves againsl
lhe largel.

Undead Fortitude. If damage reduces lhe zombre lo OI hil
poinls, il musl make a Conslilulion saving lhrow wilh a DC
of 5 + lhe damage laken, unless lhe damage is radian or
from a crilical hil. On a success, lhe zombie drops lo 1 hil
poinl inslead.

ACTIONS

ACTlONS

Hooves. Melee Weapon Attack: +4 lo hil, reach 5 fI., one largel.
Hit: 11 (2d6 + 4) bludgeoning damage.

Hit: 4 (ld6 + 1) bludgeoning damage.

APPENDlX

D I CREATURf.

S ATISTICS

311

ApPENDIX

E: INSPIRATIONAL

NSPIRATION FORALLOFTHE

FANTASYWORK I HAVE

dane stems directly from the lave my father
showed when I was a lad, for he spent many
hours telling me stories he made up as he went
along, tales of cloaked old men who could grant
wishes, of magic rings and enchanted swords,
ar wicked sorcerers and dauntless swordsmen ..
. . A11 of us tend to get ample helpings of fantasy
when we are very young, fram fairy tales such as those
written by the Brathers Grimm and Andrew Lang.
This often leads to reading books of mythology. paging
thraugh bestiaries, and consultation
of compilations
of the myths of various lands and peoples. Upon such
a base J built my interest in fantasy. being an avid
reader of a11science fiction and fantasy literature
since 1950. The fo11owing authors were ofparticular
inspiration to me.
-E. Gary Gygax, Oungeon Master's Guide (1979)

r

A greal deal of fanlasy lileralure has been published
since lhe co.crealor of OUNGEONS& ORAGONSwrote
lhose words, including breakthrough
works seI in lhe
shared worlds of 0&0. The following lisl includes
Gary's originallisl and some addilional works lhal have
inspired lhe game's designers in lhe years since.
Ahmed, Saladin. Throne of the Crescent Moon.
Alexander, L1oyd.The Book ofThree and lhe rest of the
Chronicles af Prydain series.

Anderson, Paul. The Broken Sword, The High Crusade, and
Three Hearts and Three Lions.
Anthony, Piers. Split Infinity and the rest of the Apprentice
Adept series.
Augusta, Lady Gregory. Gods and Fighting Men.
Bear, Elizabeth. Range ofGhosts and the rest of the
Eternal Sky trilogy.
Bellairs,john. The Face in the Frost.
Brackett, Leigh. The Best of Leigh Brackett, The Long
Tomorrow, and The Sword of Rhiannon.
Brooks, Terry. The Sword of Shannara and the resl of the
Shannara noveis.
Brown, Fredric. HaJl of Mirrors and What Mad Universe.
Bulfinch, Thomas. Bulfinch's Mythology.
Burroughs, Edgar Rice. At the Earth's Core and the rest
ofthe Pellucidar series, Pirates ofVenus and the rest of
lhe Venus series, and A Princess of Mars and the rest of
the Mars series.

Carter, Lin. WarriorofWorlds End and the rest ofthe
World's End series.
Cook, Glen. The Black Company and the rest of the Black
Company series.

de Camp, L. Sprague. The FaJJible Fiend and Lest
Darkness FaJl.
de Camp, L. Sprague & Fletcher Pratt. The Compleat
Enchanter and the rest of the Harold Shea series, and
Carnelian Cube.
Derleth, August and H.P. Lovecraft. Watchers out ofTime.
Dunsany, Lord. The Book ofWonder, The Essential Lord
Dunsany CoJlection, The Gods of Pegana, The King of
Elfland's Daughter, Lord Dunsany Compendium, and The
Sword of WeJleran and Other Tales.

312

APPENDIX

E I INSPIRATIONAL

READING

READING

Farmer, Philipjose. MakerofUniverses
and lhe rest ofthe
World of Tiers series.
Fax, Gardner. Kothar and the Conjurer's Curse and the rest of
the Kolhar series, and Kyrik and the Lost Queen and the rest
of the Kyrik series.
Froud, Brian & Alan Lee. Faeries.
Hickman, Tracy & Margarel Weis. Dragons of Autumn TwiJight
and lhe rest of the Chronicles Trilogy.
Hodgson, William Hope. The Night Land.
Howard, Robert E. The Coming ofConan the Cimmerian and
the rest af the Canan series.

jemisin, N.K. The Hundred Thousand Kingdoms and the
rest of the lnheritance series, The Killing Moon, and The
Shadowed Sun.
Jordan, Robert. The Eye of the World and the rest of the Wheel
af Time series.

Kay, Guy Gavriel. Tigana.
King, Stephen. The Eyes ofthe Dragon.
Lanier, Sterling. Hiero'sjourney and The Unforsaken Hiero.
LeGuin, Ursula. A Wizard of Earthsea and the rest of the
Earthsea series.
Leiber, Fritz. Swords and Deviltry and the rest of the Fafhrd &
Gray Mouser series.

Lovecraft, H.P. The Complete Works.
Lynch, Scott. The Lies of Locke Lamora and the rest of the
Gentlemen Bastard series.
Martin, George RR. A Game ofThrones and the res! ofthe
Song of Ice and Fire series.
McKillip. Patricia. The Forgotten Beasts of Eld.
Merritt, A. Creep, Shadow, Creep; DweJlers in the Mirage; and
The Moon Pool.
Miéville, China. Perdido Street Station and the other
Bas-Lag novels.
Moorcock, Michael. Elric of Melniboné and the rest of the
Elric series, and Thejewel in the SkuJl and lhe rest of the
Hawkmoon series.

Norton, Andre. Quag Keep and Witch World.
Offutt, Andrew J., ed. Swords against Darkness fll.
Peake, Mervyn. Titos Groan and the rest of the
Gormenghast series.

Pratchelt, Terry. The Colour of Magic and lhe rest of the
Discworld series.

Pratt, Fletcher. Blue Star.
Rothfuss, Patrick. The Name ofthe Wind and the rest ofthe
Kingkiller series.
Saberhagen, Fred. The Broken Lands and Changeling EartiJ.
Salvatore, RA. The Crystal Shard and the resl of The
Legend of Drizzt.
Sanderson, Brandon. Mistborn and the rest of the
Mislborn trilogy.
Smith, ClarkAshlon. The Return ofthe Sorcerer.
SI. Clair, Margaret. Change the Sky and Other Stories, The
Shadow People, and Sign ofthe Labrys.
Tolkien,j.R.R The Hobbit, The Lord ofthe Rings. and The
Silmarillion.
Tolstoy, Nikolai. The Coming ofthe King.
Vance,jack. The Dying Earth and The Eyes ofthe Overworld.
Weinbaum, Stanley. VaJlcy of Drcams and The Worlds of Ir.
Wellman, Manly Wade. The Golgotha Dancers.
Williamson,jack. The Cosmic Express and The Pygmy Planet.
Wolfe, Gene. The Shadowofthe
Torturer and the rest ofThe
Book of the New Sun.
Zelazny, Roger.jack of Shadows and Nine Princes in Amber
and the rest of the Amber series.

INDEX

o hit points. 5ee hít points:
dropping to o

abilitycheek,
7, 12, 173-179,
contest, 174
graup, 175
passive, 175
skill,174-175

186

skills with different abilities
(variant), 175
working together, 175
ability modifier, 7, 13. 173
determining,
13, 173
table. 13, 173
ability seore, 7, 12-13, 173
custornizing
(variant), 13
determining, 12-13
increase. See under racial traits
paint cosi lable, 13
rolling,13
slandard sei, 13
summary, 12, 173
using, 173-179
Ability Seore Improvement.
See

specifrc ,Iou entries
abjuration, l' 5, 203
5chool (wizard). See under
arcane traditions
Abjuration Savan! (wizard), 115
Abjure Enemy (paladin). Set

under Channel Divinity paladin
options

abjurer, 11 5
Abyss. lhe. See planes af existente
Abyssal. See language
AC. See Armor Class
Acheron. See planes of existenee
acid damage. See damage types
acolyte. See under background
Aeolyte ofNature
(elerie), 62
Aerobaties (skill). See under
Dexterity
aetion, 189, 192-193
Attack aetion, 192
east a spell. See easting a spell:
easting time
Dash action, 192
Disengage aetion, 192
Dodge aetion, 192
Help aetion, 192
Hide aetion, 192
improvising, 193
Ready aetion, 193
Search action, 193
Use an Objeet aetion, 193
Aetion Surge (fighter), 72
advancement.
See undereharacter
advantage, 7, 173
adventure, 5, 7-8
See also adventuring
adventurer. See charaeter
adventuring,
181-187
adventuring gear, 148, 150-153
table, 150
age (eharacter). See specific roce

entries
Agonizing Blast (warloek). See
eldritch invocatians
aHgnment, 122
of planes. See planes of
existence: alignment of
Alter Memories (wizard), 117
ammunition
(weapon property).
See weapon praperties
Animal Handling (skill). See undu
Wisdom
Aquan. See language
Arborea. See planes of existence
Arcadia. See planes of existenee
Arcana (skill). See under
Intelligenee
Areane Charge (fighter), 75
areane magic, 205
See also bard; martial
arehetypes: Eldritch Knight;
roguish arehetypes: Areane
Trickster; sorcerer; warlock;
wizard
Arcane Reeovery (wizard), 115
Arcane Tradition (wizard), 115
arcane traditions, 115-119
School of Abjuration, 115-116
School ofConjuration,
116
Sehool of Divination, 116-117
Sehool of Enehantment,
117
Sehool of Evoeation, 117-118
School af llIusion, 118
Sehool ofNecromancy,
118119
Sehool ofTransmutation,
119
Areane Trickster (rogue). Su unda
roguish archetypes
ArcaneWard
(wizard), 115
Archdruid (druid), 67-68

Archery. See under fighting styles
Archfey, the (warlock). See under
otherworldly patrons
area of effect, 204-205
armor and shields, 144-146
barding, 155, 310
casting a spell in. See casting a
spell: in armor
getting into and out of, 146
Stealth. 144
table, 145
ArmorClass
(AC), 7, 14, 144, 177
ArmorofShadows
(warlock). See
eldriteh invocations
armor proficiency, 144

See olso specific c1QSSentries
Artificer's Lore (rock gnome), 37
Ascendant Step (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Aspect of the Beasl (barbarian),

50
Assassin (rogue). See wnder
roguish archetypes
Assassinate
(rogue), 97
Astral Plane. See planes of
existence
Athletics (skill). See under
Strength
attack of opportunity. See
opportunity attack
attack, H, 193-196
Attack aetion. See under action
attack modifier, 14, 194
spell. See specific Spel/eosting

entries
attack reli, 7. 14, 176, 177, 194
ability modifier, 194
Dexterity-based,
177, 194
modifiers to, 194
proficiency bonus, 194
rolling a 1, 194
rolling a 20, 194
spell. See spell attack roll
Strength.based,
176, 194
Auran. See language
Aura of Courage (paladin). 85
Aura of Devotion (paladin), 86
Aura of Proleetion (paladin), 85
Aura ofWarding (paladin), 87
automatic hit. See attack reli:
rolling a 20
automatic miss. See attack rell:
rolling a 1
Avatar of Battle (elerie), 63
Avenging Angel (paladin), 88
Awakened Mind (warlock), 1lO
background,
11, 12, 1]-14,
125-141
acolyte, 127
charlatan, 128
criminal. 129-130
eustomizing,
125-126
enlertainer, 130-131
equipment,
125
folk hero, 131-132
gladiator (variant), 131
guild artisan, 132-133
guild merchant (variant), 133
hermit, 134-135
languages. 125
noble, 135-136
noble knight (varianl), 136
outlander, 136-137
pirate (variant), 139
proficiencies, 125
sage, 137-138
sailor, 139
soldier, 140--141
spy (variant), 130
suggested characteristies,
125
urehin,141
Bad Reputation (pirate variant],
139
barbarian, 45, 46-50
primai paths. See primai paths
quick build, 47
bard, 45, 51-55
eolleges. See bard eolleges
quick build, 52
spelllist, 207
Bard College (bard), 54
bard colleges, 54-55
Col1ege of Lore, 54-55
College ofValor, 55
Bardie Inspiration (bard), 53-54
barding. See under armor and
shields
base aUack bonus. See proficiency
bonus
base save bonus. See proficiency
bonus
bat. See creature slatistics
Baule Magic (bard), 55
Battle Master (fighter). See wnder
martial archetypes

bear, bfack. See creature statisties
bear, brown. See creature statistics
Beastlands, lhe. See planes of
existence
Beast Master (ranger). See under
ranger archetypes
Beast Speech (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Beast Spells (druid), 67
Beguiling Defenses (warlock), 109
Beguiling Influence (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Bend Luek (sorcerer), 103
Benign Transposition
(wizard), 116
Bestial Fury (ranger), 93
Bewitching Whispers (warlock).
See eldriteh invocalions
Blessed Healer (e1erie), 60
Blessings ofKnowledge
(e1erie), 59
Blessing ofthe Trickster (c1eric), 63
blinded. See conditions
Blindsense (rogue), 96
blindsignt, 183
bludgeoning damage. See damage
types
boar. See creature statistics
bonds. See personality
bonus, 7
bonus aetion, 189
See olso easting a spell; casting
time
Book of Ancient Seerets (warlock).
See eldriteh invocations
Book ofSnadows
(warlock), 108
Border Etnereal. See planes of
existence
Brave (haIAing), 28
breaking concentration.
See
concentration
Breath ofWinter (monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
Breath Weapon (dragonborn),
34
bright Iignt. See light
bringing back the dead. See under
dead
Brutal CriticaI (barbarian), 49
buli rush. See shoving
By Popular Demand (entertainer),
130
Bytopia. See planes of existence
Calishite. See human ethnieities
campaign, 5, 6
cantrips, 201
See Q/so Spel1casting: bard;
c1eric; druid; fighter, Eldritch
Knight; rogue, Areane Trickster;
sorcerer;
warlock; wizard
Carceri. See planes of existence
Careful Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
carrying capacity. See wnder Iifting
and earrying
casting a spell, 201-205
area of effect, 204-205
at a higher levei, 201
attack rolt, 205
casting time, 202
eombining effeets, 205
components,
203
duration, 203-204
in armor, 201
range, 202-203
saving throw, 205
targeting, 204

See Q/so specific SpellcQsting
entries
casting time. See under casting
a spell
eat. See creature statistics
Celestial. See language
centipede, giant. See creature
statistics
Cnains of Carceri (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Champion (fighter). See under
martial arcnetypes
Channel Oivinity (eleric), 58-59
multielassing
ando See under
multielassing
(paladin),85
See olso Channel Divinity eleric
options; Channel Divinity
paladin options
Channel Divinity eleric options,
59-63
Charm Animais and Plants
(Nature Domain), 62
Cloak ofShadows
(Triekery
doma in), 63
Destroy Undead, 59
Destructive Wrath (Tempest
domain),62
Guided Strike (War domain). 63
lnvoke Duplieity (Triekery
domain),63

Knowledge ofthe Ages
(Knowledge domain), 59
Preserve Ufe (Ufe domain), 60
Radianee oflne Dawn (Ught
domain),61
Read Thougnls (Knowledge
domain),59-60
Turn Undead, 59
War God's Blessing (War
doma in), 63
Channel Divinity paladin options,

86-88
Abjure Enemy (Oath of
Vengeance),88
Nalure's Wrath (Oath ofthe
Ancients),87
Saered Weapon (Oath of
Devotion).86
Turn the Faithless (Oatll of the
Ancients),87
Turn the Unholy (Oath of
Devotion),86
Vow of Enmity (Oatn of
Vengeance),88
chaotic evil. See alignment
chaotic goOO. See alignment
chaotic neutral. See alignment
character, 5,11-15
advancement,
15
age. See speeific rQce entries
alignment. See alignment
crealing a, 11-15
deseribing your, 13-14
equipping your, 14, 125,
143-157
height and weight, 121
name, 121. See 0/$0 speeific roce

entries
personality. See personality
sex and gender, 121
charaeter sheet, 11, 317-319
Charisma, 12, 178-179
checks, 178-179
Deception, 178
Intimidation,
179
Performance,
179
Persuasion,
179
eharlatan. See under background
Charm Animais and plants
(elerie). See under Channel
Divinity elerie options
eharmed. See conditions
eheck. See ability cneck
Chondathan.
See human
ethnicities
Cirele Forms (druid), 69
(irele ofthe Land (druid). See
under druid cireles
(irele ohhe Moon (druid). See
under druid circles
Cirele Spells (druid). 68
Cily Seerets (urchin), 141
Cleansing Touch (pafadin), 85
Cloak ofShadows
(eleric). See
wnder Channel Divinity eleric
options
{monk),80
c1ass,11,45
choosing a, 11
features, 11, 15
proficiencies,
12
quick build, 11

See o/so $peeific closs en/ries
c1ear path to the target. See
casting a spel1: targeting
Clench ofthe North Wind (monk).
See Elemental Disciplines
eleric, 45, 56-63
divine domains. See divine
domains
quick build, 57
spelllist, 207-208
climbing. See under movement
coinage, 143
cold damage. See damage types
College ofLore (bard). See undu
bard colleges
College ofValor (bard). See under
bard colleges
Colossus Slayer (ranger). See
Hunter's Prey
combat, 8, '&9-198
mounted,198
step by step, 189
underwater, 198
Comhat lnspiration (bard), 55
eombat round. See time: round
Combat Superiority (fighter), 73
Combat Wild Shape (druid), 69
combining spell effects. See
casting a spell: combining
effects
Commander's
Strike maneuver
(fighter). See maneuvers
Common. See language

l.,.,,'

~="~:~;
SI
eomponent,
spell.
casting
spell: component
See a/so material pell
eomponent;
som tie spell
component;
verb I spell
component
concentration,
203-104
conditions,
290-2921
cone. See area of elfect

a

conjuration,
116, 20l
school (wizard).
ee under
arcane tradilions
canjur.ation Savant 'Hizard),116
conjurer, 116
Constltution,
12, 17
c~ecks, 177
hlt points ando S~ h.it points
conlainer capacity, 1.p3
contes!. See under abillty eheek
Controlled Chaos (strcerer),
103
Converting a spell si t to sorcery
points (sorcerer). See Font
of Magic
eopper pieee (cp) S e eoinage
Corona of Light (ele c),61
Countercharm
(bard , 54
eover, 196
crafting. See downtite
activíty
crawling. See under
ovement
Create Thrall (warlo k), 110
creating a character. See under
character
I
creating spell slots (torcerer). See
Font of Magic
,
creature statistics, 304-311
criminal. See under ackground
Criminal Contact (c minal),129

I

~~~~~.a~i~~~'S~~6crea~re statistics
cube. See area of e et
Cunning Action (ro e). 96
eurrent hit points. S e hit poinls:
current
Cuttmg Words (bar ,54-55
cylinder. See area af ffect
damage, 14, 196-197
at O hit points. ste underdeath
saving throws
damage resistance,
97
Damage Resistance (dragonborn),

34
damageroll,
14, 17,177,196
Dexterity-based,
77
spell, 196
Strength-based,
76
more than one t rget, 196
weapon, 14, 196
damage types, 196
damage vulnerabili
,197
Damaran. See hum n ethnicities
Dampen Elements
leric),62
Danger Sense (bar
rian),48
Dark Delirium (war ck),109
dark elf. See elf
darkness. See lighl
Dark One's Blessin (warlock),109
Dark One's Own L k (warlock),
109
darkvision, 183, 18

See o/so speeific

ce entries

WlU

Dash aetion. See
action
De. See Difficulty C ss
dead,197
bringing back th . See the spell
descriptionsfor
aise dead,
reinearnate, res rredion,
revivify, true res rrection
deafened. See cond tions
death,197
instant, 197
monsters and, 1
Death domain, 293
death saving throw ,197
damage at O hit oints, 197
rolling a 1 or 20 n,197
Death Strike (rogu ,97
Deception (skill). S e under
Charisma
deep gnome. See gome
Deep Speech. See I nguage
Defense. See under ghting styles
Defensive Tacties { nger),93
DeAect Missiles (
nk), 78
dehydration.
See fo d and drink:
water requirem nts
deities, 293-299
Celtie, 297, 298
Dragonlance,2
3, 295
Eberron, 293, 2 6
Egyptian, 2978, 299
Forgotten Real s, 293, 294
Greek, 297, 298
Greyhawk, 293, 95

1 'OEX

313

nonhuman,
293, 296
Norse, 298, 299
See a/so e1eric; druid; paladin
demiplanes.
See planes of
existence
Destroy Undead. See under
Channel Divinity e1eric options
Destruetive Wrath (e1erie). See
under Channel Divinity e1eric
options
Devil's Sight (warloek). Su
eldriteh invocations
Dexterity. 12, 176-177
Acrobatics, 176
checks, 176-177
Sleight ofHand, 177
Stealth, 177
Diamond Soul (monk), 79
d (abbreviation).
See dice
dice, 6-7
d20rd3,7
percentile,6
difficult terrain. See under
movement
Difficulty Class (DC), 7, 174
typical DCs table, 174
dim light. See lighl
disadvantage,
7, 173
Disarming Attack maneuver
(fighter). See maneuvers
Disciple oflife (e1eric), 60
Disciple ofthe Elements (monk).
80
Discovery (hermit), 134
Disengage action. See under action
Distant Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
Distracting Strike maneuver
(fighter). See maneuvers
divination, 116-117,203
school (wizard). See under
areane traditions
Divination Savant (wizard), 116
Divine Domain (deric), 58
doma in spells, 58
divine domains, 59
Knowledge, 59-60
life, 60
light,60-61
Nature, 61-62
Tempest,62
Trickery, 62-63
War, 63
Divine Health (paladin), 85
Divine Intervention (c1eric), 59
divine magic, 205
See o/so cleric; druid; paladin;
ranger
diviner,116
Divine Sense (paladin), 84
Divine Smite (paladin), 85
Divine Strike (e1eric, life domain),
60
(e1erie, Tempest domain), 62
(e1erie, Trickery domain), 63
(e1eric. War domain), 63
DM. See Dungeon Master
Dodge action. See under action
doma in spells. See under Divine
Domain
donning and doffing armar. See
armor and shields: getting into
and out of
downtime activities, 187
draconians,
34
Draconic, 34
alphabet, 124
See o/so language
Draconic Ancestry (dragonborn),

3'
Draconic Presence (sorcerer), 102
Draconic Resilience (sorcerer), 102
Dragon Ancestor (sorcerer), 102
dragonborn,
32-34
dragonborn
names, 33-34
dragonborn
traits, 34
Dragon Wings (sorcerer), 103
draw or sheathe a weapon. See
objects: using during combat
Dreadful Word (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
drink (expenses). 158
drop an object. See objects: using
during combat
drow. See elf
Drow Magic, 24
druid, 45. 64-69
druid cireles. See druid cireles
quick build, 65
spelllist. 208
Druid Cirele, 67
druid cireles, 68-69
Cirele ofthe land, 68-69
Cirele ofthe Moon, 69
Druidic,66

INDEX

druidicfocus,

150. 151
See 0150 spellcasting focus:
druid
druids ilnd the gods, 69
Dueling. See under fighting styles
duergar. See dwarf
Dungeon Master (DM), 5
Durable Summons
(wizard), 116
duration. See unducasting
a spell
dwarf, 1&-20
dwarf names, 20
dwarf traits, 20
Owarven Armor Training
(mountain dwarf), 20
Owarven Combat Training, 20
Dwarven Resilience, 20
Dwarven Toughness (hill dwarf),

20
Owarvish, 20
alphabet, 122
See O/50 language
effect, 201
Elder Champion (paladin), 87
Eldritch Invocations (warlock), 107
eldritch invocations. 110--111
Eldritch Knight (fighter). See undu
martial archetypes
Eldritch Master (warlock), 108
Eldritch Sight (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Eldritch Spear (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Eldritch Strike (fighter), 75
electrum piece (ep). See coinage
Elemental Affinity (sorcerer), 103
Elemental AUunement (monk).
See Elemental Disciplines
Elemental Chaos. See planes of
existence
Elemental Disciplines (monk), 81
Elemental Planes. See planes of
existence
Elemental wild Shape (druid), 69
elf,21-24
elf names, 22-23
elftraits, 23-24
ElfWeapon Training, 23, 24
Elusive (rogue), 96
Elvish, 23
alphabet, 123
See a/so language
Elysium. See planes of existence
Empowered Evocation (wizard),
117
Empowered Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
Empty Body (monk), 79
encnantment,
117, 203
sehool (wizard). See under
arcane traditions
Enchantment
Savant (wizard), 117
enchanter, 117
encounters.
See under travei
encumbrance.
See under lifting
and carrying
entertainer. See under backgrollnd
Entropic Ward (warlock). 110
environment,
183-185
equipment,
14, 125. 143-161
background,125
packs, 151
size (variant), 144
starting, 143
See 0150 adventuring gear;
armor and shields: tools;
mounts and vehieles; weapon;

ond specifie boelc.ground entries
under boelc.grounds
equipment
packs. See under
equipment

See 0150 speeifie c/ou entries:
quick build
Escape the Horde (ranger). See
Defensive Tactics
escaping a grapple, 195
Eternal Mountain Defense
(monk). See Elemental
Disciplines
Ethereal Plane. See planes of
existence
Evasion (monk), 79
(ranger). See Superior Hunter's
Defense
(rogue),96
Evasive Footwork maneuver
(fighter). See maneuvers
evocation, 117-118,203
school (wizard). See undu
arcane traditions
Evocation Savant (wizard), 117
evoker, 117
Exceptional Training (ranger), 93
exception-based
rules. See under
rules
exhaustion,
181, 185, 291

exotic language. See language
expenses. 157-158, 187
experience points (XP). 15
multielassing
and. See /)nder
multiclassing
Expert Divination (wizard), 116
Expertise (bard), 54
(rogue),96
exploration, 8
Extended Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
Extra Attack (barbarian), 49
(bard), 55
(fighter), 72
(monk),79
{paladin),85
{ranger),92
Eyes ofthe Rune Keeper (warlock).
See eldritch invocations
Faerie. Su planes of existence:
Feywild, the
falling, 183
False Identity (charlatan),
128
familiar (warlock), 107
Fangs ofthe Fire Snake (monk).
See Elemental Disciplines
Far Realm. See planes of existence
Fast Hands (rogue), 97
Fast Movement (barbarian), 49
Favored Enemy (ranger), 91
feats, 165-170
gaining, 165
prerequisites,
165
Feinting Attack maneuver
(fighter). See maneuvers
Ferallnstinct
(barbarian), 49
Feral Senses (ranger), 92
FeyAncestry (elf) , 23
(h,lf-eI0. 39
Fey Presence (warlock). 108
Feywild, the. See planes of
existence
Fiendish Resilience (warlock), 109
Fiendish Vigor (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Fiend, the (warlock). See /)nder
otherworldly patrons
fighter, 45, 70-75
martial archetypes. See martial
archetypes
quick build, 71
Fighting Style (fighter), 72
(paladin),84
{ranger),91
fighting styles, 72,84,91
Archery, 72, 91
Defense, 72, 84, 91
Dueling, 72, 84, 91
Great Weapon Fighting, 72, 84
Protection, 72, 84
Two-Weapon Fighting, 72, 91
finding a hidden creature, 177
finding a hidden object. 178
finesse (weapon property). See
weapon properties
fire damage. See damage types
Fist of Four Thunders (monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
Fist of Unbroken Air (monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
Flames ofthe phoenix (monk).
See Elemental Disciplines
flaws. See personality
Fleet of Foot (wood elf), 24
Flexible Casting (sorcerer). See
Font of Magic
Flurry of Blows (monk). See Ki
flying. See /)nder movement
Focused Conjuration
(wizard), 116
Foe Slayer (ranger), 92
folk hero. See under background
Font of Inspiration (bard), 54
Font of Magic (sorcerer). 101
food and drink, 158, 185
expenses, 158
food requirements,
185
water requirements,
185
foraging. See under traveI
force damage. See damage types
forced march. See under
movement
forest gnome. See gnome
Frenzy (barbarian), 49
frigntened. See conditions
frog. See creature statistics
gaining a levei, 15
Gargantuan.
See size category
Gaze ofTwo Minds (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Gehenna. See planes of existence
gender. See character: sex and
gender
getting into and out of armor. See
undu armor and shields
Giant. See language

Giant Kilter (ranger). See Hunter's
Prey
gladiator. See under background
gnome, 35-37
Gnome Cunning (gnome), 37
gnome names, 36
gnome traits, 36-37
Gnomish,37
See language
Goading Attack maneuver
(fighter). See maneuvers
gold dwarf. See dwarf
gold piece (gp), 14
See also coinage
Gong ofthe Summit (monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
grappled. See conditions
grappling, 195
gray dwarf. See dwarf
Greater Portent (wizard), 117
Great Old One, the (warlock). See
under otherworldly patrons
Great Weapon Fighting. See under
fighting styles
Great Wheel, the. See planes of
existence
grid (variant), 192
Grim Harvest (wizard), 118
group checks. See under ability
check
Guided Strike (eleric). See under
Channel Divinity e1eric options
guild artisan. See under
background
Guild Membership
(guild artisan),

1lJ
guild merchant. See under
baekground
Hades. See planes of existence
half cover. See cover
half-elf, 38-39
nalr-elf names, 39
half-elftraits,39
halAing, 26-28
HalAing (language), 28
See 0150 language
halAing names. 27
Halfling Nimbleness,
28
halAing traits, 28
half-orc,4Q--41
halr-orc names, 41
half-orc traits, 41
hawk. See creature statistics
healing, 197
hearing. See Wisdom: Perception
See O/50 conditions
heavily obscured, 183
heavy (weapon property). See
weapon properties
heavy armor. See armor and
shields
See a/50 movement: in heavy
armor
heavy weapons and Small
creatures, 147
height and weight. See under
character
Heightened Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
Hellish Resistance (tiefling), 43
Help action. See under action
hermit. See under background
hidden, 177, 178
See a/50 Dexterity: Stealth;
finding a hidden creature;
finding a hidden object; hiding;
unseen attackers and targets
Hide action. See under action
Hide in Plain Sight (ranger), 92
hiding, 177
hign elf. See elf
hill dwarf. See dwarf
hirelings, 159
History (skill). See under
Intel1igence
Hit Dice, 12
multielassing
ando See under
multielassing

See also speeifie c/oss entries
hit point maximum, 12, 15, 177
hit pOints, 12, 13, 15, 177,
196-198
Constitution
and, 177
current, 196
damage at O. See under death
saving throws
droppingtoO,
197-198
increasing with leveI, 15
multiclassing
ando See under
multielassing
starting. 12, 13
subtracting damage from, 196
temporary.198
holding breath. See suffocating
Holy Nimbus (paladin), 86

holy symbol. See Spellcasting:
eleric; paladin
Horde Breaker (ranger). See
Hunter's Prey
Morse, riding. See creature
statistics
See 0150 mounts and vehieles
how to play. See under rules
Huge. See size category
human, 29-31
human ethnicities, 30--31
human names, 30, 31
human traits, 31
variant,31
Hunter (ranger). See /)nder ranger
archetypes
Hunter's Prey (ranger), 93
Hurl Through Hell (warlock), 109
hustle. See action: Dash action
Hypnotic Gaze (wizard), 117
ideais. See personality
Ignan. See language
illusion, 118, 203
school (wizard). See under
arcane traditions
illusionist, 118
IIlusion Savant (wizard), 118
IIluskan. See numan ethnicilies
IlIusory Reality (wizard), 118
lllusory Self (wizard), 118
imp. See creature statistics
Impostor (rogue). 97
Improved Abjuration (wizard), 115
Improved Combat Superiority
(fighter), 74
Improved Criticai (fighter), 72
Improved Divine Smite (paladin),

85
Improved Duplicity (eleric), 63
Improved Fiare (e1eric), 61
Improved Minor Illusion (wizard),
118
lmproved War Magic (fighter), 75
improvised weapons. See under
weapon
incapacitated.
See conditions
Indomitable
(fighter), 72
Indomitable Might (barbarian), 49
Infernal. See language
Infernallegacy
(tietling), 43
Infiltration Expertise (rogue), 97
initiative, 177, 189
Inner Planes. See planes of
existence
Insight (skill). Ser: underWisdom
inspiration, 125
instantaneous
(spell duration), 203
Instinctive Charm (wizard), 117
Intelligence, 12, 177-178
Arcana, 177
checks, 177-178
History, 177-178
Investigation,
178
Nature, 178
Religion, 178
Intimidating Presence (barbarian),
49-50
Intimidation
(skill). See under
Charisma
Inure<! to Undeath (wizard), 119
Investigation
(skill). See under
lntelligence
invisible. See conditions
See a/50 unseen attackers and
targets
Invoke Duplícity (deric). See under
Channel Divinity e1eric options
Jack of Ali Trades (bard), 54
jumping. See under movement
Keen Senses (elf), 23
Ki (monk), 78
saving throws, 78
Ki.Empowered Strikes (monk), 79
ki points, 78
spells and, 80
knighí. See background:
noble
knight
knocking a creature out, 198
KnowYour Enemy (fighter), 73-74
Knowledge domain (e1eric). See
under divine domains
Knowledge ofthe Ages (e1eric).
See under Channel Divinity
eleric options
land's Stride (druid), 69
(ranger),92
language, 17, 123, 125
Druidic. See Druidic
thieves' can!. See thieves' cant
large. See size category
lawful evil. See alignment
lawful good. See alignment
lawful neutral. See alignment
lay on Hands (paladin), 84
learning spells. See specifie

Spe/lco~ting entrie5
lethal damage. See damage
levei, 11, 15
life domain (deric). See under
divine domains
lifedrinker (warlock). See eldrilch
invocations
lifestyle. See e.penses
lifting and carrying, 176
carrying capacity, 176
encumbrance
(variant), 176
size and, 176
lighl,183
light (weapon property). See
weapon properties
light armor. See armor and shields
light domain (c1eric). See under
divine domains
lightly obscured, 183
lightning damage. See damage
types
limbo. See planes of e.istence
line. See area of effect
line of sighl. See casting a spelJ:
targeting
Iion. See erealure statisties
listening. See Wisdom: Pereeption
Ste a/ro eonditions
loading (weapon property). See
weapon properties
lock, opening or pieking. See
thieves' tools
lodging (expenses), 158
lolth, 24, 296
long resto See resting
lower Planes. See planes of
existenee
low.light vision. See darkvision
lueky (halfling), 28
lunging Attack maneuver
(fighler). See maneuvers
Mage Hand legerdemain
(rogue),98
Magical Ambush (rogue), 98
Magical Seerets (bard), 54
magic, 8, 201-289

See a/so specific c1ass entries
magic item. See underwealth
magic-user. See wizard
See 0150 arcane magie
Malleable lIIusions (wizard), 118
maneuver (fighter), 73
Maneuvering Attaek maneuver
(fighter). See maneuvers
maneuvers, 73, 74
list, 74
saving throws, 73
mapping. See under travei
marching order. See tmder travei
Martial Archetype (fighter), 72
martial archetypes, 72-75
Battle Master, 73-74
Champion, 72-73
Eldritch Knight, 74-75
Martial Arts (monk), 78
martial weapon. See weapon
categories
Mask of Many Faces (warloek).
See eldritch invocations
Mask oflheWild
(wood eU), 24
Masler of Myriad Forms
(warloek). See eldriteh
invoealions
Master of Nature (c1erie), 62
Master Transmuter
(wizard), 119
mastiff. See ereature statistics
See 0150 mounts and vehicles
material spell component,
203
Material Plane. See planes of
existenee
Mechanus. See planes of existenee
Medicine (skilt). See under
Wisdom
Medium. See size category
medium armor. See armor and
shields
melee attaek, 195
unarmed,195
with a weapon that requires
ammunition,
147
reach,195
melee weapon, 14, 146, 149, 195
Menacing (half-orc), 41
Menacing Attack maneuver
(fighler). See maneuvers
Metamagie (soreerer), 101-102
Military Rank (soldier), 140
Mindless Rage (barbarian), 49
Minions ofChaos
(warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Minor Alchemy (wizard), 119
Minor Conjuration (wizard), 116
Mire lhe Mind (warloek). See
eldritch invocations
Mist Stanee (monk). See

Elemental Disciplines
Misty Escape (warlock), 109
Misty Visions (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
modifier,7
ability, 7
bonus, 7
penalty, 7
monastic orders, 81
Monastic Tradition (monk), 78
monastic traditions, 79-81
Way of the Open Hand, 79-80
Way of Shadow, 80
Way of the Four Elements,

80-81
monk, 45,76-81
monastic traditions. See
monastie lraditioos
quick build, 77
monk weapons, 78
moon elf. See elf
mount. See mounts and vehicles
mountain dwarf. See dwarf
Mount Celestia. See planes of
existence
mounted combal. See under
combat
mounts and vehicles, 155, 157
See a/ro under movement
move aelion. See movement
movement,
181-183, 190--192
around ereatures, 191
breaking up, 190
dimbing, 182, 190
crawling, 182, 191
combat, 190-192
difficult terrain, 182, 190
flying, 191
prone, 190-191
forced march, 181
in heavy armor, 144
jumping, 182, 190
mounts and vehicles, 181-182
size, 191-192
speed, 14, 17, 181
squeezing, 192
sland up, 190-191
swimming, 182, 190
travei pace, 181
using diFferent speeds, 190
moving a grappled creature, 195
Mulan. See human ethnicities
mule. See creature statistics
Multiattack (ranger), 93
Multiattack Defense (ranger). See
Defensive Tactics
multiclassing,
163-164
Channet Divinity, 164
e.perience points, 163
hit points and Hit Dice, 163
Pact Magic, 16-4
prerequisites,
163
proficiencies,
163-164
proficieney bonus, 163
spell slots, 164
Spcllcasting, 164
speJls known and prepared, 164
Unarmored
Defense, 164
multiverse, 5-6, 293, 300
Mystic Arcanum (warloek), 108
name. See under character
Natural Explorer (ranger), 91
Naturallllusionist
(forest gnome),
J7
Naturally Stealthy {Iightfoot
halfling),28
Natural Recovery (druid), 68
Nalure (skill). See under
Intelligence
Nature domain (cleric). See under
divine domains
Nature's Sanetuary (druid), 69
Nature's Ward (druid), 69
Nature's Wrath (paladin). See
under Channel Divinity paladin
options
navigaling. See under travei
necromancer,
118-119
necromancy, 118, 203
school (wizard). See under
areane traditions
Necromancy Savant (wizard), 118
necrotic damage. See damage
types
Negative Plane. See planes of
existence
neutral. See alignment
neutral evil. See alignmenl
neutral good. See alignment
Nine Hells, lhe. See planes of
e.istenee
noble. See under background
noble knight. See under
background
nonplayer character (NPC), 8,

159,185,189,198
nonlethal damage. See damage
N Pc. See nonplayer character
Oalh of Devotion (paladin). See
under sacred oaths
Oath of the Ancients (paladin).
See tmder sacred oaths
Oath ofVengeance
(paladin). See
under sacred oaths
oath spells. See under Sacred Oath
objects, 185
attacking, 185
interacting with, 185
using during combat, 190
ane with Shadows (warlock). See
eldrilch invocations
Open Hand Technique (monk), 79
open locks. See thieves' tools
Opportunist
(monk), 80
opportunity
attaek, 195
OrC,41
See 0150 language
orison. See cantrip
Dtherworldly leap (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Otherwordly Patron (warlock), 107
otherworldly patrons, 108-110
Archfey, lhe, 108-109
Fiend, the, 109
Greal Old Dne, the, 109-110
Outer Planes. See planes of
existence
outlander. See under background
Outlands, lhe. See planes of
existence
Overchannel
(wizard), 118
owl. See creature statistics
Pact Boon (warlock), 107-108
Pael ofthe Blade, 107-108
Pact ofthe Chain, 107
Pael ofthe Tome, 108
Your Pact Boon, 108
Pact Magic (warlock), 107
multiclassing
ando See under
multiclassing
pact weapon (warlock), 107-108
paladin, 45, 82-88
quick build, 83
sacred oaths. See sacred oaths
spel1lis1. 208-209
Pandemonium.
See planes of
existence
panther. See ereature statisties
paralyzed. See eonditions
Parry maneuver (fighler). See
maneuvers
party (adventuring),
15
passive check. See under ability
cheek
Path of the Berserker. See under
primai paths
Path ofthe Totem Warrior. See
under primai palhs
Patient Defense (monk). See Ki
Peerless Skill (bard), 55
penalty,6
percentile (dice). See underdice
Perception (skill). See under
Wisdom
See 0150 travei: noticing threats
Perfect Self (monk), 79
Performance
(skill). See under
Charisma
Persistent Rage (barbarian), 49
personality (character), 122-124
Persuasion
(skill). See under
Charisma
petrified. See conditions
pick locks. See thieves' tools
pick pockets. See Dexterity: Sleight
ofHand
piercing damage. See damage
types
pirale. See under background
planar travei, 301
plane of Air. See planes of
e.istence
plane of Earth. See planes of
e.istence
Plane of Faerie. See planes of
e.istence
plane of Fire. See planes of
existence
Plane ofShadow. See planes of
existence
Plane ofWater. See planes of
existenee
planes of existence, 5, 300-303
plalinum piece (pp). See coinage
player eharacter. See character
point of origino See area of effect
poison damage. See damage types
poisoned. See conditions
Position of Privilege (noble), 135
Positive Plane. See planes of

existence
Portent (wizard), 116
Potent Canlrip (wizard), 117
Potent Spellcasting (c1eric,
Knowledge domain), 60
(c1eric, light domain), 61
Precision Attack maneuver
(fighter). See maneuvers
preparing spel1s. See Spellcasting:
c1eric: druid; paladin; wizard
Preserve life (cleric). See under
Channel Divinity cleric options
Primai Champion (barbarian), 49
Primai Patn (barbarian), 48
primai palhs, 49-50
Path ofthe Berserker, 49-50
Path oflhe Totem Warrior, 50
PrimaI Strike (druid), 69
Primeval Awareness (ranger), 92
Primordial. See language
profession. See downtime activity
proficiencies,
11, 12, 14, 155
multiclassing
ando See under
multiclassing
saving throw, 14
skHl, 14
spell,14
tool,14
vehicle, 155
weapon,14
proficiency bonus, 14, 173-174,
194
adding, 14, 173
dividing, 14, 173-174
increasing with levei, 15
multidassing
ando See under
multiclassing
multiplying, 14, 173-174
Projecled Ward (wizard), 115
projectile weapon. See weapon
properties: ammunition
prone, 190-191
See a/50 conditions
Protection. See tmderfighting styles
pseudodragon.
See crealure
stalistics
psychic damage. See damage types
punching. See under melee attack
Purity of Body (monk), 79
Purity ofSpirit (paladin), 86
Pushing Attack maneuver
(fighter). See maneuvers
quasit. See crealure statistics
quick build, 11

See 0150 under specific c1a55
entries
Quickened Spell (soreerer). See
Metamagie
Quivering Paim (monk), 80
race, 11
choosing a, 11, 17
traits. See racial traits

See a/so 5pecific roce entrie5
racial ability score increase. See
racial traits: ability score
increase
racial traits, 11, 17
ability seore increase, 11, 12,
13, 17
age, 17
alignment, 17
languages, 17
size, 17
speed,17
subrace, 17

See a/50 specific roce
entries
Radiance ofthe Oawn (cleric). See
underChannel
Divinity cleric
options
radiant damage. See damage types
Rage (barbarian), 48
Rally maneuver (fighler). See
maneuvers
range, 195
maximum, 147
normal. 147
of spells. See casting a spell:
range
range (weapon property). See
weapon properlies
ranged attack, 195
in melee, 195
ranged weapon, 14, 146, 149, 195
ranger, 45, 89-93
quick build, 90
ranger archetype. See ranger
archetypes
spelllisl, 209
Ranger Archetype (ranger), 92
ranger archetypes, 93
Beast Mastl':r, 93
Hunter,93
Ranger's Companion
(ranger), 93
Rasnemi. See numan ethnicities

ral. See creature statis ics
raven. See creature st.tistics
reach (creature), 1951
reach (weapon pro~e1Y)' See
weapon propertles
reaction, 190

I

R,,~~~::g':,:"(~~,:;r~:,,::::,g
Channel Divlnity c1;ric oplions
Ready adion. See undfr action
Reckless Attack (barb rian), 48
recovering ammunitiqn.
See weapon prope ties:
ammunition
recuperating.
See do
activity
refitling plate armor.
plate armor
Relentless (fighter), 7
Relentless Avenger (p,!.Iadin), 88
Relentless Endurance ~half-orc), 41
Relentless Rage (bar])arian), 49
Reliable Talent (rogue!. 96
religion, 293
See 0150 cleric: dru d; paladin
Religion (skitl). See u~der

l

Intelligence
reloading. ~ee weapo
properties:
ammunllion
See 0150 objects: u ing during
combat; weapon Rroperties:
loading
Remarkable Athlete ( ghter), 72
Repelling Blast (warl ek). See
eldritch invocatio s
researeh. See downti
e activity
Researcher (sage), 1 8
resistanee. See dama e resistance
resting, 186
restrained. See condi ions
resull. See lolal
Retainers (noble vari nt), 136
Retaliation (barbaria ), 50
Ride the Wind (mon
. See
Elemental Discipl nes
Riposte maneuver (fi nler). See
maneuvers
Ritual Casting. See S ellcasting:
bard; c1eric; druid wizard
See 0150 feals
rituais, 201-202
See 0/50 casting a pell: casting
time
River of Hungry Fia e (monk).
See Elemental Oi iplines
rock gnome. See gn
rogue, 45, 94-98
quick build, 95
roguish archetyp
See roguish
archetypes
Roguish Archetype ( gue),96
roguish archetypes,
7-98
Arcane Trickster, 7-98
Assassin,97
Thief,97
roleplaying, 8,185-1
roll,6-7
round. See under ti
rounding numbers,
rowed vessel, 155-1
rules,6-7
exceptions, 7
how to play, 6
specific beats ge eral, 7
run. See action: Das action
Rush ohhe Cale Spi its (monk).
See Elemental Oi ciplines
Rustic Hospitality (~ Ik hero), 131
Saered Oatn (paladi ),85
oatn spells, 85
sacred oaths, 85-88
breaking, 86
Dath of Oevotio
85-86
Oath of the Anci nts, 86-87
Oath ofVengean
e,87-88
sacred plants and w d (druid), 66
Sacred Weapon (pai din). See
under Channel O inity paladin
options
sage. Set under bac round
sailor. See under bac ground
Savage Attacks (hal orc),41
save. See saving thr w
saving throw, 7, 12, 79,205
death. See death aving throws
ki. See ki: saving hrows
maneuver. See
neuvers:
saving throws
proficiency. See
oficiencies:
saving throw
spell. See spell s ving throws
saving throw modifi r, 12, 179,
205

,

INDEX

3'5

School of Abjuration (wizard). See
under arcane traditions
School of Conjuration
(wizard).
See under arcane traditions
School of Divination (wizard). See
under arcane traditions
School of Enchantment
(wizard).
See under arcane traditions
School of Evocation (wizard). See
under arcane traditions
School of IIlusion (wizard). See
under arcane traditions
School of Necromancy (wizard).
See under arcane traditions
School ofTransmutation
(wizard).
See under areane traditions
sehools of magic. See areane
traditions
Sculptor of Flesh (warloek). See
eldritch invoeations
Seulpt Spells (wizard), 117
Second.Story Work (rogue), 97
Second Wind (fighter), 72
Search action. See under action
searching. See under travei
See 0/50 IntelJigence:
Investigation; Wisdom:
Perceplion
self. See casting a spell: range;
targeting
selling treasure. See under wealth
services, 159
sexo See character: sex and gender
Shadow Arts (monk), 80
Shadowfell, the. See planes ef
existenee
Shadow Step (monk), 80
Shapechanger
(wizard), 119
Shape the Flowing River (monk).
See Elemental Disciplines
Share Spells (ranger), 93
shark, reef. See creature statistics
Shelter ofthe Faithful (acolyte),

127
shield. See armor and shields
shield dwarf. See dwarf: mountain
Ship's Passage (sailor), 139
short rest. See resting
Sheu. See human ethnidties
shoving, 195
Sigil. See planes of existenee
Signature Spells (wizard), 115
silvered weapon. See under
weapon
silver piece (sp). See coinage
simple weapon. See weapon
categories
size, 176, 191-192
and weapons. See weapon
properties: heavy
lifting and carrying. See lifting
and carrying: size and
of equipment.
See equipment:
size
space, 191-192
See 0150 racial traits; and

spec!fic roce trail entries
size category, 191
skeleton. See creature statistics
skill check. SeI! ability check: skill
Skill Versatility (half.elf), 39
skills with different abilities
(variant). See under abihty check
slashing damage. See damage
types
Sleight ofHand (skill). See under
Dexterity
Slippery Mind (rogue), 96

Slow fali (monk). 78
Small. See size category
snake, constrictor. See creature
statistics
snake, poisonous.
See creature
statistics
Sneak Attack (rogue). 96
social interaction. 8,185-186
soldier. See underbackground
somatic spell component,
203
Song of Rest (bard), 54
sorcerer, 45, 99-104
quick build, 100
sorcerous origino See soreerous
origins
spell list, 209
Sorcerous Origino 101
sorcerous origins, 102-104
Draconic Bloodline, 102-103
Wild Magic, 103-104
Sorcerous Restoration, 102
Sorcery Points (sorcerer). See Font
ofMagic
Sou I ofVengeance
(paladin), 88
space. See under size
Speak with Small Beasts (forest
gnome),37
special (weapon property). See
weapon properties
speed. See under movement
See a/50 mounts and vehieles;
radal traits; travei
speJl,201
spell attack modifier. See spec!fic

Spellcosling entries
spell attack roll, 205

See a/so spec!fic Spellcasting
entries
Spell Bombardment
(sorcerer), 103
Spellbook (wizard), 114
spellcaster.201
spellcasting,
201-205
Spellcasting
(bard), 52-53
(e1eric), 58
(druid),66
(fighter, Eldritch Knight), 75
(paladin),84-85
(ranger),91-92
(rogue, Arcane Trickster),
97-98
(sorcerer),101
(warlock). See Pact Magic
(wizard), 114
See 0150 under multiclassing
spellcasling ability, 178, 179,205

See 0150 spec!fic Spel/costing
entries
spellcasting focus. See
Spellcasting: bard; e1er!c;
druid; paladin; sorcerer;
warlock; wlzard
spell components.
See easting a
spell: components
See 0150 material spell
componenl;
somatic spell
compenent;
verbal spell
component
spell descriptions,
211-289
spell leveI, 201
spell list, 207-211
Spell Mastery (wizard). 115
spell preparation.
See
Spellcasting: e1eric; druid;
paladin: wizard
See 0150 under multiclassing
SpelJ Resislance (wizard). 116
spell save DC, 205

See a/50 spec!fic Spellcosling
entries
spell saving throws, 205
spells known, 201
See a/50 Spellcasting: bard;
fighter, Eldritch Knight; ranger;
rogue, Arcane Trickster;
sorcerer; warlock; ond
multiclassing
spell slots, 201

See a/50 specific Spellcosting
entries; ond multielassing
Spell Thief (rogue), 98
sphere. See area of effect

spider, giant. See creature
statislics
Spirit Seeker (barbarian), 50
Spirit Walker (barbarian), 50
Split Enchantment
(wizard), 117
sprite. See creature statistics
spy. See under background
squeezing. See under movement
stabili.zing a creature, 197
stable, 197-198
staeking. See casting a speJl:
combining effects
See 0150 advantage;
disadvantage
standard action. See action
standard language. See language
Stand Against the Tide (ranger).
See Superior Hunter's Defense
starting wealth. See underweallh
starvation. See food and drink:
food requirements
Stealth (skill). See under Dexterity
See a/50 armor and shields:
Stealth; hiding; travei
Steel Will (ranger). See Defensive
Tactics
Step ofthe Wind (monk). See Ki
StiIJness of Mind (monk), 79
Stonecunning
(dwarf), 20
Stormborn (cleric), 62
Stout Resilience (stout halfling),

28
Strength, 12, 175-176
Athletics, 175
checks, 175
Stroke of luck (rogue), 96
strongheart
halfling. See halfling:
stout
Student ofWar (fighter), 73
stunned, See conditions
Stunning Strike (monk), 79
subrace, 17
Subtle Spell (sorcerer), See
Metamagic
suffocating, 183
sun elf. See elf
Sunlight Sensitivity (drow), 24
Superior Criticai (fighter), 73
Superior Darkvision (drow), 24
Superior Hunter's Defense
(ranger),93
Superior Inspiration (bard), 54
superiority dice (fighter), 73
Supreme Healing (cleric), 60
Supreme Sneak (rogue). 97
surprise, 189
See a/50 travei: surprise
Survival (skill). See underWisdom
See 0/50 traveI: foraging,
navigating, or tracking
Survivor (fighter), 73
svirfneblin. See gnome
Sweeping AUack maneuver
(fighter). See maneuvers
Sweeping Cinder Strike (monk).
See Elemental Disciplines
Sylvan. See language
targeting a spetl. See casting a
spell: targeting
target number, 7
Armor Class (AC), 7
Difficulty Class (DC). 7
Tempest doma in (cleric). See
underdivine
domains
temporary hlt points. See undu
hit points
Tenets of Devotion (paladin), 86
Tenets ofthe Ancients (paladin),
86-87
Tenets ofVengeance
(paladin), 88
Terran. See language
Tethyrian. See human ethnicities
THACO. See attack roll
Thief (rogue). See undu roguish
archetypes
Toief of Five Fates (warlock). See
eldrítch invocatíons
Thief's Reflexes (rogue), 97
thieves' cant (rogue), 96
thieves' 10015, 154
Third Eye, The (wizard), 116-117
Thirsting Blade (warlock). See
eldritch invocations
Thought Shield (warlock), 1lO
Theusand Forms (druid), 69
three.quarters
cover, See cover
thrown (weapon property). See
weapon properties
Thunderbolt
Strike (cleric), 62
tnunder damage. See damage
types
lides ofChaos
(sorcerer), 103

tiefling.42-43
tiefling names, 43
tiefling traits, 43
tiers of play, 15
tiger. See creature statistics
time, 181
day, 181
minute, 181
round. 181, 189
turn, 189
Timeless 80dy (druid), 67
(monk),79
Tinker (roek gnome), 37
Tiny. See size category
Tongue oftne Sun and Moon
(monk),79
tools, 154
total, 7
total cever. See cover
Totemic Attunement
(barbarian),

50
Totem Spirit (barbarian), 50
tracking. See undertravel
trade goods, 144, 157
training. See downtime activity
traits. See under personality

See a/50 spec!fic roce troít entries
Trance (elf), 23
Transitive Planes. See planes of
existence
Tranquility (monk), 80
transmutation,
119,203
school (wizard). See under
arcane traditions
Transmutation
Savant (wizard),
119
transmuter,
119
Transmuter's
Stone (wizard), 119
traps, finding. See Wisdom:
Perception
See 0150 Intelligence:
Investigation
traps, removing or disabling. See
thieves' tools
travei. 181-183
drawing a map, 183
encounters,
183
foraging, 183
marching order, 182
navigating, 183
noticing threats, 182-183
pace, 181
searching, 183
stealtn, 182
surprise, 183
tracking, 183
Trickery doma in (clericJ. See under
divine domains
trinkets, 160-161
Trip AUack maneuver (fighter). See
maneuvers
truesight, 185
Turami. See numan ethnicities
turno See under time
turn, taking yeurs, 189-190
See a/50 action; bonus action;
movement
Turn the Faithless (paladin). See
under Chanoel Divinity paladin
options
Turn the Unholy (paladin). See
under Channel Divinity paladin
options
Turn Undead. See undu Channel
Dívinity e1eric options
Twinned Spell (sorcerer). See
Metamagic
two.handed
(weapon property).
See weapon properties
two.weapon fighting, 195
Two.Weapon Fighting (class
feature). See undu fighting
styles
unarmed. See under melee attack
Unarmored
Defense (barbarian),

48
(monk),78
Unarmored Movement (monk), 78
Uncanny Dodge (ranger). See
Superior Hunter's Defense
(rogue),96
Undead Thralls (wizard), 119
Underdark, 17
Undying Sentinel (paladin), 87
uncommon
races, 33
unconscious,
197, 198
See a/50 conditions
Undercommon.
See language
underwater combato See undu
combat
unseen attackers and targets,
194-195

Upper Planes. See planes ef
existence
urchin. See under background
Use an Objecl action. See under
action
Use Magic Device (rogue), 97
using this book, 6
Vanish (ranger), 92
vehicle. See mounts and vehicles
verbal spell component,
203
versalile (weapon property). See
weapon properties
Versatile Trickster (rogue), 98
vision, 183
See 0150 blíndsight; darkvision;
truesight; Wisdom: Perceplion
Visions of Distant Realms
(warlock). See eldritch
invocations
Visions ofthe Past (cleric), 60
Voice ofthe Chain Master
(warJock). See eldritch
invocations
Volley (ranger). See Multiattack
Vow of Enmity (paladin). See
under Channel Divinity paladin
options
vulnerability. See damage
vulnerability
Wanderer (outlander),
136
Warding Fiare (cleric), 61
War domain (cleric), See under
divine domains
War God's Blessing (cleric). See
under Channel Divinity cleric
options
warhorse. See creature statistics
See 0150 mounts and vehicles
War Magic (fighter), 75
War Priest (deric), 63
WaterWhip
(monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
warlock, 45, 105-111
quick build, 106
otherworldly patrono See
otherworfdly patrons
spell Iist, 210
Wave of Rolling Earth (monk). See
Elemental Disciplines
wealth,143-144
magic item, 144
sellíng treasure, 144
slarting, 143
See a/50 expenses
weapon, 14, 146-148, 149
improvised,147-148
silvered,148
table, 149
Weapon Bond (fighter), 75
weapon categories, 146
weapon preficiency, 14, 146

See 0/50 spec!fic classes:
proficiencies; and spec!fic roce
traít entries
weapon properties,
146-147
Weave, the, 205
Whirlwind Attack (ranger). See
Multiatlack
Whispers ofthe Grave (warlock).
See eldritch invocations
Wholeness ofBody (monk), 79-80
wild elf. See elf
wild Magic (sorcerer). See under
sorcerous origins
Wild Magic Surge (sorcerer), 103
table, 104
Wild Shape (druid), 66-67
Wisdom, 12, 178
Animal Handling, 178
checks, 178
Insight, 178
Medicine, 178
Perception, 178
Survival, 178
Witch Sight (warlock). See eldritch
invocations
wizard, 45, 112-119
arcane tradition. See arcane
Iraditions
quick build, 113
spell Iist, 210-211
wolf, dire. See creature statístics
wolf. See creature statistics
wood elf. See elf
world, 5-6, 8
See also planes ef existence:
Material Plane
Wrath ofthe Storm (e1eric), 62
XP. See experience points
Ysgard. See planes of existence
zombie. See creature statistics

DUNGEONS &DRAGONS@
CLASS-&--L:E"VE-L
-------------BACKGROUND

ALlGNMENT

Q
Q
Q
bJ
Q
Q

o

)

INSPIRATION

PROFICIENCY BONUS

__

o

5trength

__

Dexterity
Constitution

__

CURRENT HIT POINTS

lntelligence
Wisdom
Charisma
SAVING THROWS

TEMPORARYHIT POINTS

"o

Acrobatics (Dex)

o

Animal Handling

Total

.

(Wis)

O
O
O

Arcana (Int)

O
O
O

History (Int)

Intimidatian

(Cha)

O

Investigatian

(lnt)

O
O

Medicine (Wis)

O
O

Perception (Wis)

Athletics (slr)
Deception

(Cha)
NAME

ATK BONUS

DAMAGEfTYPE

Insight (Wis)

Nature (Int)

Performance

(Cha)

O

Persuasion (Cha)

O

Religion (Int)

O

sleight or Hand (De,)

O
O

stealth (De,)
Survival (Wis)
SKILLS

(J

INITIATIVE

PASSIVE WISDOM

ATIACKS & SPELLCASTING

(PERCEPTION)

._--------_. --- _.- ._-

OTHER PROFICIENCIES & LANGUAGES

EQUIPMENT

EXPERIEN

AGE

CHARACTER

._._--.~~_._----------------_.

EVES------

NAME

HEIGHT

--------_...

WEIGHT

SKIN

---------_._-------------

HAIR

NAME

----_.------------_._--------------------

.._------------------------------------------

AlUES 8< ORGANIZATIONS

CHARACTER APPEARANCE

----------------------------_.
-----------. ._------._-------_. __ .._----------------------_._._---_._---------_ .....---------------------

__

--------------

______

0 ••

___

-

•••

_-----------

._-----------------------------------------_.

.... _._-------------------_._----------

------_.

-----------------------~---------

-----------

-------

___

...

o

_-

._----- --_._--

---------_._. ------- ._--------------_._._----------_._.-- ---._._-------- .._-~---_._--_._---- -- ..----------------------

._._._-~---------------_ ..-

-------------- --_._---_.

--------------------------_.-------------------_._----

_.__ ._--- -_._------_._-----------

__

__ ..._------------------_._--------------_.

.... -

-- ..... _._----------------------------_

-----------------------._
•..
._--------_._. ._._-------_. ------------- --_._------------------

-----------------------... __ ..- ..... --- ... _-----------~_._- _._----... _._-----------------

_--_

..._--------------_._-~---------------_._-_.-

--------_.-

.._----------------------------------

.._._-- .......•. _._--_ ..__ .._--_._--_ ....- ..._-- ..._ ... _._ ..
._---------------_._--------- -_. __ .--- -- -- ._--_._._----------

--------------_._--------------------------

---------------------_

---_ .._-------------------------------------

----~----------------~

-_._----------------_._--

--- .... __ .._----~------------

--------------------------~-_._. __ ..-.- .... _------------------------------_
.. ._---------------_._- --- --- .... _- --- ._-_._---_ .._-----------

__

----------------_._-----------------

-----------_. __ .. ._~----------

A OOITIO NAl FEATU RES 8< TRAITS

- ------------ --------------------------------------------------------------------------------

---------------------------------------------

CHARACTERBACKSTORY

TREASURE

(--) (-_) o )
SPELLCASTI
NG
A8lLlTY

SPELLCASTING
CLASS

SPELL
SAVEDC

..L:. _

I Ge.=~í

=) I~_~
_l __

=CANTRIP=S

i~

0___________

o
o

0___________

o

0___________
0___________

o
o

0___________

o

0___________
0___________

o
o

0___________

SLOTS EXPENDED

SPEll NAME

0

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

O
O

0
0

O
O

l

:)
_

o
o
o

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o
o

l

J

l

I

]1
II

~

o

0

t

o

_
_

O
0

e)

o

_

SPELb
ATTACK
8pNUS

o

..•
o
o
o
o
o

)~~

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0

_

0
0

_
_

0

_

I

E~ ]
o
o
o
o
o

I~

]

WHAT COMES NEXT?

J~

AVINGDELVED
INTOTHEDEPTHS
OF
character creation, it's time to consider
your next steps. The fun of D&D is in
playing the game, not just making up
characters (though that's fun, too).
The Starter Set is a great next step if you want to try
your hand at being a Dungeon Master and introduce
your friends to lhe game. lf you don't know any DMs, try
taking on that role yourself. The Starter Set is the best
place to begin your journey.
The D&D basic rules include some of the information
provided in this book, along with the material necessary
to create your own campaign. After absorbing the
Starter Set, check out the D&D basic rules, available as
a free download at DungeonsandDragons.com.
The Monster Manual describes the most important
monsters in the DUNGEONS& DRAGONSuniverse.
The manual is aimed at DMs, but it's also a useful
reference for players.
The Dungeon Master's Cuide is the ultimate tome
of DM lore. lt includes magic items, optiona! rules,
and guidelines for creating everything from a sim pie
dungeon to an entire cosmos for your campaign.
Each year brings the publication of new D&D
adventures. These scenarios and campaigns are the
perfect way to try your hand at running a D&D game
with a minimum of work.
Looking for a regular D&D game or prefer dropping in
when you have time? Check the Store and Event Locator
on our website to see if your local game store is running
events such as D&D Encounters or D&D Expeditions.

WHAT

COMES

NEXT

Bring your games to life with a suite of enhancements
from a robust set of player and DM digital tooIs to
accessories Iike miniatures, vinyl mats, campaign maps,
clothing, and more.
It isn't always possible to gather a regular gaming
group. In such situations, DUNGEONS& DRAGONS
board games present an ideal casual play experience.
Vou'lI also find a variety of digital games that offer
a D&D experience across Mac, PC, tablets, and
mobile devices.

.rJV~=========::;::~'b
LEVEL UP YOUR 0&0 GAME BY VISITING
DUNGEONSANDDRAGONS.COM
TO SEE THE SUITE OF
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS OFFERINGS.

